The social contract
in the 21st century
Outcomes so far for workers, consumers,
and savers in advanced economies




                                          February 2020


McKinsey Global Institute


Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) has sought to develop a
deeper understanding of the evolving global economy. As the business and economics
research arm of McKinsey & Company, MGI aims to help leaders in the commercial, public, and
social sectors understand trends and forces shaping the global economy.

MGI research combines the disciplines of economics and management, employing the
analytical tools of economics with the insights of business leaders. Our “micro-to-macro”
methodology examines microeconomic industry trends to better understand the broad
macroeconomic forces affecting business strategy and public policy. MGI’s in-depth reports
have covered more than 20 countries and 30 industries. Current research focuses on six
themes: productivity and growth, natural resources, labor markets, the evolution of global
financial markets, the economic impact of technology and innovation, and urbanization.
Recent reports have assessed the digital economy, the impact of AI and automation on
employment, physical climate risk, the productivity puzzle, the economic benefits of tackling
gender inequality, a new era of global competition, Chinese innovation, and digital and
financial globalization.

MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners: co-chairs James Manyika and
Sven Smit, and director Jonathan Woetzel. Michael Chui, Susan Lund, Anu Madgavkar, Jan
Mischke, Sree Ramaswamy, Jaana Remes, Jeongmin Seong, and Tilman Tacke are MGI
partners, and Mekala Krishnan is an MGI senior fellow.

Project teams are led by the MGI partners and a group of senior fellows and include
consultants from McKinsey offices around the world. These teams draw on McKinsey’s global
network of partners and industry and management experts. The MGI Council, which includes
leaders from McKinsey offices around the world and the firm’s sector and regional practices,
includes Michael Birshan, Andrés Cadena, Sandrine Devillard, André Dua, Kweilin Ellingrud,
Tarek Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta, Eric Hazan, Acha Leke, Gary Pinkus, Oliver Tonby,
and Eckart Windhagen. Council members help shape the research agenda, lead high-impact
research, and share the findings with decision makers around the world. In addition, leading
economists, including Nobel laureates, advise MGI research.

The partners of McKinsey fund MGI’s research; it is not commissioned by any business,
government, or other institution. For further information about MGI and to download reports,
please visit www.mckinsey.com/mgi.


                               The social contract
                               in the 21st century
                               Outcomes so far for workers, consumers,
                               and savers in advanced economies

                               February 2020




Authors
James Manyika, San Francisco

Anu Madgavkar, Mumbai

Tilman Tacke, Munich

Jonathan Woetzel, Shanghai

Sven Smit, Amsterdam

Abdulla Abdulaal, Dubai


     Preface

     What the social contract is—and how and why it changes—has preoccupied philosophers,
     economists, and social scientists for at least four millennia, encompassing the Code of
     Hammurabi, Plato’s Republic, and the European Enlightenment when, among others,
     Jean‑Jacques Rousseau used the term in his 1762 book, On the Social Contract. At its
     core, the social contract is the implicit relationship between individuals and institutions.
     History suggests that the discussion about the social contract is most active in times of
     broad economic, social, and political upheaval.

     It is thus perhaps not surprising that the subject has once again become topical, given
     the shifts fueled by technology and globalization in market and political economies since
     the start of the 21st century—not to mention the 2008 financial crisis. Public sentiment,
     as expressed in opinion polls over the past few years, suggests that we are living in a new
     era of rising discontent, mistrust of institutions, and an economy that does not work well
     for everyone. This remains true despite significant progress in some economic indicators,
     including employment rates and GDP growth, along with technological advancements and
     improvements in education and longevity.

     Discussion of the social contract often encompasses the political economy and society’s
     institutions, including governments, as well as issues of values and social justice in
     communities small and large, local and global. In this research, our focus is on its economic
     aspects. This report is the latest MGI publication focusing on shifting economic outcomes
     for different groups of individuals. Previous publications include 2016 reports on income
     stagnation, consumer trends, and investment returns, and 2019 papers on inequality and
     on labor share of national income.1

     The research was led by James Manyika, chairman of the McKinsey Global Institute,
     Anu Madgavkar, and Tilman Tacke, MGI partners based in Mumbai and Munich, respectively.
     MGI directors Sven Smit and Jonathan Woetzel provided input, guidance, and support,
     as did Jan Mischke, an MGI partner in Zurich. The research team was led at different stages
     by Abdulla Abdulaal, Maggie Desmond, and Manuel Schönfeld. Team members were
     Yunnan Jiang, Joh Hann Lee, Kimberley Moran, Katie Parry, and TJ Radigan.

     We are grateful to external academic advisers who guided and reviewed our work: Martin
     Baily, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution; Richard Cooper, professor of international
     economics at Harvard University; Harold James, professor of history and international affairs
     at Princeton University; Hans-Helmut Kotz, program director at the SAFE Policy Center
     at Goethe University and resident fellow at the Center for European Studies at Harvard
     University; Dani Rodrik, professor of international political economy at the John F. Kennedy
     School of Government at Harvard University; Michael Spence, Nobel laureate and professor
     of economics at New York University’s Stern School of Business and senior fellow at the
     Hoover Institution; and Laura Tyson, Distinguished Professor of the Graduate School at the
     University of California, Berkeley.

     This research has benefited from a growing body of work on various aspects of the implicit
     social contract. We are particularly grateful to the following authors, whose work was a core



     1
         Previous McKinsey Global Institute reports include Urban world: The global consumers to watch, March 2016;
         Diminishing returns: Why investors may need to lower their expectations, May 2016; Poorer than their parents? Flat or
         falling incomes in advanced economies, July 2016; A new look at the declining share of labor income in the United States,
         May 2019; and Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, July 2019.




ii   McKinsey Global Institute


source of data and research for us throughout this report: Jacob S. Hacker, The Great Risk
Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the Decline of the American Dream, 2019; Peter Hall
and David Soskice, Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative
Advantage, 2001; and Joseph Stiglitz, Amartya K. Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Measurement
of economic performance and social progress, 2009. We also gained insight from OECD
publications, primarily Under pressure: The squeezed middle class, and How’s life? Measuring
well-being.

Many colleagues at MGI and McKinsey & Company provided valuable expert input and
support: Tim Beacom, Lucas Beard, Lucie Bertholon, Michael Birshan, Ankit Bisht,
Stephanie Carlton, Michael Chui, Eoin Daly, Alex D’Amico, Penny Dash, Angus Dawson,
Eduardo Doryan, Ivan Dyakonov, Jonathan Fantini-Porter, Danielle Feffer, Alistair Fernie,
David Fine, Andrew Gerba, Eric Hazan, Aditi Jain, Konstantin Jüngling, Mekala Krishnan,
Kate Lazaroff-Puck, Susan Lund, Hassan Noura, Gary Pinkus, Joshua Powell,
Sree Ramaswamy, Olivia Robinson, Stephanie Savir, Shilpi Sharma, Vivien Singer,
Shubham Singhal, Neslihan Ana Sönmez, Kevin Sneader, Paolo Zampella, and Jimmy Zhao.

This report was edited and produced by Peter Gumbel, MGI editorial director, together with
production manager Julie Philpot, graphics design team leader Vineet Thakur, and senior
graphic designers Laura Brown, Jayshree Iyer, Richard Johnson, Pradeep Rawat, and
Patrick White. Nienke Beuwer, MGI director of external communications, helped disseminate
and publicize the report. Lauren Meling, MGI digital editor, ensured digital and social media
diffusion. We are grateful to Kaizeen Bharucha, Amanda Covington, Deadra Henderson,
Bettina Lanz, and Sarah Portik for personnel and administrative support.

This report contributes to MGI’s mission to help business and policy leaders understand
the forces transforming the global economy. As with all MGI research, this research is
independent and has not been commissioned or sponsored in any way by business,
government, or other institution. We welcome your comments at MGI@mckinsey.com.




James Manyika
Director and Co-chair, McKinsey Global Institute
Senior Partner, McKinsey & Company
San Francisco


Sven Smit
Director and Co-chair, McKinsey Global Institute
Senior Partner, McKinsey & Company
Amsterdam


Jonathan Woetzel
Director, McKinsey Global Institute
Senior Partner, McKinsey & Company
Shanghai

February 2020




The social contract in the 21st century                                                         iii


© Getty images


Contents

In brief                                                vi

Executive summary                                        1

1. The evolving social contract                        29

2. Individuals as workers                              39

3. Individuals as consumers                            63

4. Individuals as savers                               79

5. The shifting role of institutions                   95

6. Outcomes for different social and economic groups   109

7. Adapting the social contract for the 21st century   117

Appendix                                               129

Bibliography                                           159




The social contract in the 21st century                  v


In brief
The social contract in the 21st century: Outcomes so far for workers, consumers,
and savers in advanced economies

Individuals in advanced economies have been exposed to                While spending on public-sector wages and various
significant changes in the economy over the first two decades         government transfers to individuals rose from an average
of the 21st century. These changes have been driven by                of 38 percent of GDP in 2000 to 41 percent in 2018, it
technology and globalization, the economic crisis of 2008,            was largely because of higher aging-related costs. This
and shifting market economy and institutional dynamics.               pattern of greater “individualization” of the social contract
While many of the developments have brought opportunities             prevailed in most of the 22 economies, despite differing
and economic growth, this research examines what the                  market systems and levels of government spending.
economic outcomes have been so far for individuals as
workers, consumers, and savers and the extent to which these       — As a more individualized social contract evolves,
outcomes reflect a shifting balance between the individuals          different groups of individuals are affected differently.
and institutions involved. We focus on outcomes in 22 OECD           Outcomes have been favorable for about 115 million
countries since the start of this century. Our findings include:     workers equipped for high-skill jobs, individuals for
                                                                     whom discretionary consumption is relatively high
— Work opportunities have increased everywhere, and to
                                                                     compared with their spending on basics, and savers able
  record levels in some countries, but work security and
                                                                     to accumulate capital. However, more than 120 million
  income growth have declined or expanded unevenly. In
                                                                     middle-skill workers in Europe and the United States
  the 22 countries we studied, 45 million more working-age
                                                                     experienced declining employment and stagnating wages
  people were employed in 2018 than in 2000—31 million
                                                                     at a time when the cost of basics rose faster than general
  of them women. The gains in employment were primarily
                                                                     inflation. Low-income individuals experienced challenging
  driven by growth in alternative work arrangements.
                                                                     outcomes in their roles as consumers and savers.
  While work benefits such as paid leave have improved,
                                                                     Young people have less secure employment, spend
  wages have stagnated for many workers. Polarization
                                                                     more on meeting basic needs, and have just one-third
  toward high- and low-skill employment has eroded
                                                                     of the average adult wealth compared with two-thirds a
  seven million middle-skill and middle-wage jobs in
                                                                     generation ago. Women in general, and minorities in some
  16 European countries and the United States, despite
                                                                     countries, have fared less well than others in incomes
  the strong job growth overall.
                                                                     and savings.
— As consumers, individuals have benefited from improved
                                                                   — While individuals have achieved many gains that will need
  access and lower prices for discretionary goods and
                                                                     to be sustained and expanded, the bottom three quintiles
  services, such as communications, clothing, and
                                                                     of the population—about 500 million people—have
  recreation. However, rising housing prices, which account
                                                                     experienced challenges. We identify ten key questions
  for 37 percent of general inflation, together with higher
                                                                     to address if outcomes are to improve and be inclusive
  healthcare and education costs and spending, have
                                                                     as the century progresses. These include: how to reduce
  absorbed between 54 and 107 percent of the gains in
                                                                     job fragility and wage stagnation at a time of changing
  income for average households in Australia, France, the
                                                                     work arrangements; how to address rapidly rising costs of
  United Kingdom, and the United States since 2002.
                                                                     housing and, in some countries, healthcare and education;
— Household saving rates have fallen at a time when                  how to mitigate the risk of saving shortfalls for some;
  individuals have to save for longer retirement and assume          and how to address the challenges faced by particularly
  greater responsibility for saving. Since 2000, pension             vulnerable groups, including the young and lower-
  levels guaranteed by the public sector or employers                income households.
  have declined by an average of 11 percentage points. Yet
                                                                   — Policy makers, business leaders, and individuals will
  household saving rates fell in 11 of the 22 countries; in
                                                                     need to focus on two fronts. The first is sustaining
  2017, more than half of individuals did not save for old age.
                                                                     and expanding the gains achieved through continued
  While mean individual wealth has returned to pre-crisis
                                                                     economic and productivity growth; business dynamism;
  levels in 11 countries in our sample, median wealth is still
                                                                     investment in economies, technology and innovation; and
  23 percent lower on average.
                                                                     continued focus on job growth and opportunity creation.
— Changes in individual outcomes across the three arenas             The second is tackling the challenges individuals face,
  have been propelled by the changing role of institutions,          especially those most affected. Leaders are beginning to
  which are cushioning individuals to a lesser degree                respond to these opportunities and challenges to varying
  from the effects of the forces at work in the economy.             degrees. However, more is needed given the scale of the
  For example, employment protections are now lower,                 opportunities and challenges, if the outcomes for the next
  a higher share of healthcare and education costs is                20 or more years of the 21st century are to be better than
  private, and guaranteed pension levels have dropped.               the first 20 and increase broad prosperity.




vi                               McKinsey Global Institute


21st-century social contract:                                                                                                    Outcomes have changed for
                                                                                                                                 people in their roles as workers,
                                                                                                                                 consumers, and savers in
Economic outcomes for individuals so far                                                                                         22 OECD countries

                                                                 Outcomes for workers
Unprecedented job growth                                       Part-time work                +2.7                           More polarized labor market
Employment rate, % of 15–64 population                         drove job growth                                             Europe and US employment share change by
                                                                                                                            skill/wage level 2000–18, percentage points
71                                   Of 45M                    Change in                                                     4
                                                               employment rate               +4.1       Part time
                                     new jobs,                                                                               0
                                     31M for                   2000–18,                                                     -4
                                     women                     percentage points
66                                                                                            -1.4      Full time           -8
      2000                   2018                                                                                                 High    Middle       Low

                                                               Outcomes for consumers
Change in category consumer prices, indexed                                                                                                      Share of consumer
to overall inflation, percentage points                                                                                                                spending, %
 60                                                                                                                                        Education +52             2
        More expensive
        Large increases in the cost of basics including housing,
        healthcare, and education absorbed income gains for many ...                                                                       Housing +21              24
 40


                                                                                                                                           Healthcare +19            6

 20
                                                                                                                                           Other +17                20



 0
                                                                                                                                           Food +2                   11



                                                                                                                                           Transport 0               15
–20
        Less expensive
        ... while prices of discretionary goods and services                                                                               Recreation –30            8
        such as communications and clothing fell significantly                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                           Clothing –31
–40
                                                                                                                                           Furnishings –33           7
                                                                                                                                           Communications –43        3
       2002                                                       2010                                                            2018

                                                                   Outcomes for savers
Mean individual wealth recovered but       Insufficient guaranteed pensions,                         Not enough personal saving            Growing indebtedness
median is still below pre-crisis level     2018                                                      % of 15+ population


                                                                                                                                            23%
$ thousand
                                                              etirement is 20                        Not saving for retirement
300                             Mean                     er
                                                    ag                          y                                           53
250                             wealth
                                                 r




                                                                                ea
                                                e
                                             Av




                                                                                    rs




                                                           Net pension                               Not saving at all                      of US households in 2017
100                           Median
                                                          wealth covers                                                                     had zero or negative net
                              wealth                                                                           26
  0                                                         10 years                                                                        worth, vs 16% in 2001
2000         05   10    15 2018

                                    Institutions have shifted more responsibility onto individuals


                                          Two priorities for the next decades of the 21st century
1. Sustain and expand the gains        2. Find solutions for the most adversely affected groups

                                          Low-skill, low-wage               Women and minorities                       Trailing regions              Young people

                                         ~335 million                               ~295 million                    ~215 million               ~180 million
 Tech     Produc-       Higher           Stagnant wages,                             Still lag in employ-           Uneven locus of            Less stable employ-
 progress tivity        employment       more costly housing,                        ment, savings, and             economic activity,         ment, less wealth,
          and           and              and negative                               wages; female pay is            job growth, and            and a harder climb
          economic      opportunity      savings (–14% of                           85¢ per $1 for men.             innovation.                onto the housing
          growth        creation         disposable income).                                                                                   ladder than elders.


© Getty images


Executive summary
Life has changed substantially for individuals in advanced economies in the first two decades
of the 21st century as a result of trends including disruptions in technology, globalization, the
economic crisis of 2008 and its recovery, and shifting market and institutional dynamics.
Overall, the 21st century has brought opportunities and economic growth and the prospect
of more to come as the century progresses, through developments in science, technology
and innovation, and productivity growth. In many ways, outcomes so far for individuals have
been for the better. Yet the relatively positive perspective on the state of the economy, based
on national-level GDP and job growth indicators, needs to be complemented with a fuller
assessment of the economic outcomes for individuals as workers, consumers, and savers.

In doing so, this research finds that opportunities for work have expanded, employment rates
have risen to record levels in many countries, and many benefits have improved, although
not everywhere. At the same time, work polarization and income stagnation, while varying in
magnitude across countries, have grown. While the availability and cost of many discretionary
goods and services have fallen sharply, the cost of basic necessities such as housing,
healthcare, and education has grown and is absorbing an ever-larger proportion of incomes.
Coupled with wage stagnation effects, this is eroding the welfare of the bottom three quintiles
of the population by income level (roughly 500 million people in 22 countries). Public pensions
are being scaled back, and roughly the same three quintiles of the population do not or cannot
save enough to make up the difference. Moreover, in the post-crisis macro and monetary
policy environment especially, the investment opportunities for a majority of households
have been unattractive. While the average wealth for individuals has recovered to pre-crisis
levels, the wealth of the median individual is still almost one-fourth below pre-crisis levels.
This contributes to rising economic insecurity and wealth inequality.

In addition to changes in the outcomes for individuals, we also find quantifiable evidence that
individuals have had to assume greater responsibility for their economic outcomes in the
past two decades. While this research focuses on actual shifts this century, many of these
outcomes and shifts and underlying trends began decades earlier.

These changes in outcomes for individuals and the roles of institutions point to an evolution
in the “social contract”: the arrangements and expectations, often implicit, that govern
exchanges between individuals and institutions. While many have benefited from the
evolution in the social contract, for a significant number of individuals the changes are
spurring uncertainty, pessimism, and a general loss of trust in institutions.1 Some policy
makers and business leaders are responding with a public reevaluation of their role and
purpose in society.2

In this research, we aim to go beyond sentiment, to examine, in a fact-based way, how
particular aspects of the implicit and various social contracts have changed and, where
possible, to measure those changes. We focus on advanced economies, covering
22 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries that together
constitute 57 percent of global GDP, although the questions are germane for emerging
economies as well. 3


1
    Trust in government fell in more than half of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
    economies between 2006 and 2016, and almost half the people polled in 16 OECD economies believe the average person
    in their country is worse off today than 20 years ago. What worries the world, Ipsos Public Affairs, September 2018.
2
    For example, see “Business Roundtable redefines the purpose of a corporation to promote ‘an economy that serves all
    Americans,’” Business Roundtable, August 19, 2019.
3
    Our research covers Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
    Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
    and the United States.


The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                1


               The goal of this research is not to suggest undoing the gains and opportunity-creating
               developments including from technological progress, economic growth and productivity,
               and the evolution of institutions where beneficial—quite the opposite. Indeed, much will be
               required to sustain and further accelerate the gains and create conditions for more as the
               21st century progresses—topics we have discussed in our other research. 4 The goal here is
               to shed light on outcomes to date for individuals in order to motivate action to ensure that the
               exciting opportunities and potential for economic prosperity are inclusive and shared by all.

               The social contract is a very broad concept, covering multiple facets of everyday life,
               including notions of economic, social, and political arrangements as well as values, justice,
               and many other aspects of society and social arrangements at the local and global levels.5
               History suggests that the discussion about the social contract is most active in times of
               broad technological, economic, social, and political upheavals. The start of the 21st century
               has been characterized by broad shifts in advanced economies fueled by advances and
               disruptions from technology and globalization, as well as shifts in the structure and role of
               markets and institutions, shifts in political economies, and the effects of the 2008 financial
               crisis. In this research, we focus on the economic aspects of the social contract, specifically
               on the three key economic roles for individuals as workers, consumers, and savers. These
               three roles cover existential and aspirational needs of individuals to generate income to meet
               consumption needs today, enhance economic security, save for the future, and generally
               progress (see Box E1, “Assessing shifts in the social contract”).

               Gauging shifts in the social contract remains an imperfect science, and more data and
               research, especially of a comparative and disaggregated nature, are needed to complete the
               picture. Nonetheless, our findings suggest that significant enough shifts have occurred that
               business leaders, governments, and individuals may want to reevaluate the gains, benefits,
               and opportunities being created and the challenges that have emerged, and, through their
               actions, address them to achieve better and more inclusive outcomes in the next decades of
               the 21st century.


The relatively positive perspective on the state
of the economy in the 21st century so far needs
to be complemented with a fuller assessment
of the economic outcomes for individuals
as workers, consumers, and savers.
               For workers, employment has risen amid growing labor market
               polarization and wage stagnation
               Notwithstanding the financial crisis of 2008, the first two decades of the 21st century have
               seen work opportunities expand and employment participation rise to record levels in most
               countries. Work arrangements have been changing, and alternative employment, notably
               part-time work, has experienced the fastest growth. Women have entered the workforce
               in significant numbers. However, work is increasingly shifting away from middle-income
               workers, average wages have stagnated in many countries since 2000, and income growth
               has been weak.




               4
                   See, for example, the following McKinsey Global Institute reports: Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand
                   and the promise of digitization, February 2018; Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, May 2018; Notes
                   from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy, September 2018; Globalization in transition: The
                   future of trade and value chains, January 2019.
               5
                   The social contract has preoccupied philosophers and social scientists from Plato and Socrates in ancient Greece to
                   Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 17th and 18th centuries to John Rawls in the 20th. For a historical
                   discussion, see Chapter 1.




2              McKinsey Global Institute


    Box E1
    Assessing shifts in the social contract

    A growing body of research focuses on economic satisfaction and well-being and
    on various other elements of life related to the social contract.1 We chose to focus on
    three specific aspects of the implicit and various national social contracts outlined in
    Exhibit E1. For workers, this includes access to work, sufficient benefits (such as paid
    holidays), quality of work (such as training and career progression), stable employment,
    and wage growth. As consumers, people expect affordable prices that enable access
    to basic and discretionary goods and services, as well as improving quality. Here,
    we assess how costs of goods and services have grown or fallen relative to general
    inflation and also try to understand the share of consumer expenditures and share
    of income these goods and services absorb. For savers, the focus is building wealth
    and adequate provisions for retirement and economic security through participation
    in a high-return, stable capital market.2 Here we assess individual savings as well as
    savings by institutions on their behalf.

    Using these indicators, we analyze how outcomes for individuals have changed over
    the first 20 years of the 21st century in our sample of 22 OECD countries. We look at
    outcomes for populations at an aggregate level and at specific economic and social
    groups, including people of different ages, income levels, and genders.

    This research builds on and integrates perspectives from previous MGI research
    that has examined questions of income advancement, consumption sufficiency, and
    inequality in economic outcomes, among others. 3 We draw on research by many
    other researchers. 4

    Our research has several shortcomings that would have helped paint a fuller picture.
    Indeed, many researchers (including ourselves) have done focused studies on country,
    sector, or demographic segments. Wherever possible, we have tried to provide
    reference to such research. Given our goal of assessing patterns and shifts in the
    three arenas of work, consumption, and saving across 22 countries, there were many
    elements of each of them that we would have wanted to examine—for example, private
    workplace benefits, multiple job holding, mortgage payments by house owners, and
    private pensions and inheritance. However, a lack of comprehensive and comparable
    data for all the countries in our sample limited our analysis, and indeed the other kinds
    of measures in Exhibit E1 we would ideally have included. Hence the need for more
    data and further research.




    1
        Sources we examined include the OECD’s Better Life Index; Joseph Stiglitz, Amartya K. Sen, and Jean-Paul
        Fitoussi, Measurement of economic performance and social progress, 2009; the UN Human Development
        Index and Sustainable Development Goals; and Matthew Taylor, Good work: The Taylor review of modern
        working practices, UK Government, 2017.
    2
        Tax policies have an important effect on some of the indicators we consider (for example, wages and saving
        rates), but due to data limitations, we do not attempt to correct for this.
    3
        Related McKinsey Global Institute reports include: Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in
        advanced economies, July 2016; The power of parity: How advancing women’s equality can add $12 trillion to
        global growth, September 2015; A new look at the declining share of labor income in the United States, May
        2019; and Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, June 2019.
    4
        See, for example, Nemat Shafik, “A new social contract,” Finance & Development, International Monetary
        Fund (IMF), December 2018, Volume 55, Number 4; Lauren Damme, Rethinking the American social contract,
        New America Foundation, 2011; Maurizio Bussolo et al., Toward a new social contract: Taking on distributional
        tensions in Europe and Central Asia, World Bank, 2018; Including institutions: Boosting resilience in Europe,
        World Bank, 2019; A new social contract, National Economic and Social Rights Initiative, 2018; Under pressure:
        The squeezed middle class, OECD, 2019; Jacob S. Hacker, The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity
        and the Decline of the American Dream, second edition, New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2019; Dennis J.
        Snower, Toward human-centered capitalism: Exploring a new social contract, Brookings Institution, November
        2019; and Paul Krugman, The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the 1990s, Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press, 1994; Branko Milanovic, Capitalism, alone: The future of the system that rules the world,
        Harvard Univeristy Press, 2019.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                  3


Exhibit E1

Our framing of the social contract identifies commonly held expectations among workers,
consumers, and savers in a system of exchange with institutions, but excludes noneconomic
aspects.
                                                 Collaboration with                                                                  Our focus is on the economic
                                                 institutions to achieve                                                             aspects of the social contract
                                                 prosperity and share risks
                                                   Public       Private Social
Individuals in various roles,                                                              Commonly held expectations of what the social contract
and individual inputs1                                                                     will enable for individuals2

             Workers                                                                          Access and ability to participate in work
              Education, skills,                                                             Benefits, for example, paid holidays and flexibility of work
               knowledge, and                                                                 Quality such as safety, training, and career progression
               expertise                                                                      Form and stability of employment
              Time and energy                                                                Compensation, notably growth and distribution of wages

             Consumers                                                                     Examined for basic and discretionary goods and services 3
              Usage of disposable                                                          Prices and affordability
               income for                                                                   Access and availability
               consumption                                                                  Quality of outcomes

             Savers                                                                           Participation and ability to engage in saving
              Pension payments                                                               Sufficient wealth to provide a decent living in old age
              Savings and                                                                    Returns on wealth, including growth and distribution
               investment                                                                     Stability and risk of savings

             Citizens                                                                         Physical security and justice
              Adherence to laws                                                              Political voice and governance
              Civic engagement                                                               Social connections and relationships
              Contributions to                                                               Personal life satisfaction
               community / society                                                            Environmental sustainability
              Taxes                                                                          …

             …                                                                              …


1   Individual inputs refer to commitments made by individuals in their roles as workers, consumers, and savers in the social contract. For example, workers commit their
    time and energy to an employer in return for paid employment.
2   Based on literature review; extent of expectations varies across countries and individuals. Individual level of satisfaction is influenced by which expectations are most
    important to them and the extent to which those expectations are being met. Our selection of indicators within each dimension is not exhaustive but illustrative, and
    based on data available for comparison across 22 countries between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest).
3   Housing, healthcare, education, food, transportation, clothing, communications, recreation, and furnishings; other categories are restaurants and hotels, alcohol and
    tobacco, and miscellaneous goods and services.
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             Employment has risen to record levels, primarily driven by alternative work, and some
                                             aspects of work quality have improved
                                             The share of the working-age population in employment has risen strongly in our 22 sample
                                             countries since the 2008 financial crisis, to 71 percent. In 2018, 45 million more working-
                                             age people were employed than in 2000 (Exhibit E2).6 The rise is relatively consistent
                                             across countries, with the employment rate in 2018 higher than the level in 2000 in 18 of
                                             the countries; the exceptions were Denmark, Greece, Norway, and the United States.


                                             6
                                                 Eurostat Labor Force Survey, 2019; OECD Employment database, 2019. Demographics are an underlying reason for this
                                                 trend, because the working-age population is declining in many countries.




4                                            McKinsey Global Institute


In the United States, although the proportion of unemployed people (those actively seeking
jobs) fell from 4.0 percent in 2000 to 3.9 percent in 2018, the lower employment rate relative
to 2000 was due to a rising share of discouraged workers (those not seeking a job).7

Alternative work arrangements have gained in prominence over the past two decades,
typically in the form of self-employment, temporary work, part-time work, workplace fissuring,
and zero-hour contracts. The rise of alternative work arrangements has enabled greater labor
market participation: for example, part-time paid work was the primary driver of the increase
in overall employment between 2000 and 2018. Its share rose in 18 out of 21 countries, by
an average of 4.1 percentage points, equivalent to 29 million jobs, while that of full-time
employment declined by 1.4 percentage points. 8

Opportunities expanded particularly strongly for women. Of the 45 million additional workers
since 2000, 31 million are women. Female employment increased by 6.3 percentage
points between 2000 and 2018. The growth in female employment in this period is seen
almost everywhere except Norway and the United States, where it has declined by 1.3 and
2.2 percentage points, respectively. Some 14 million additional male workers were employed
during this period, although their share of the working-age population fell by 0.4 percentage
point on average.

Workers are also seeing improvements in some nonwage aspects of work quality. In 18 out
of 19 countries surveyed by the OECD, workers report they are facing less strain in their jobs.
More workers report receiving increased on-the-job training and express greater optimism
about their opportunities for job progression. Certain worker benefits have improved,
including parental leave and access to paid holidays. For those who want flexibility, the rise
of alternative work arrangements has been a positive trend, and one that has enabled more
women to enter the labor force.

Work and wage polarization has increased based on skills, and wages and incomes have
stagnated for many workers
New work opportunities have benefited high-skill, high-wage workers and low-skill, low-
wage workers, relative to the middle, which has been squeezed.9 Between 2000 and 2018,
the number of people in middle-skill, middle-wage occupations dropped by seven million
in 16 European countries and the United States, although this trend has been slowing,
particularly in the United States.

The polarization of work opportunities into high-skill and low-skill occupations (or high-wage
and low-wage work in the United States) is due in part to the shift from manufacturing to
service-sector jobs as well as a shift toward high-skill or low-skill jobs within industries, as a
result of automation and globalization.10 The growth in high-skill jobs offers real opportunities
for workers to move up the income ladder if they are able to raise their skill levels. At the same
time, it implies declining opportunities and wage stagnation for a significant share of the
workers employed in middle-skill jobs.




7
     US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019. See Chad Bown and Caroline Freund, The problem of US labor force participation,
     Peterson Institute for International Economics, working paper number 19-1, January 2019.
8
     Eurostat Labor Force Survey, 2019; OECD Employment database, 2019. The exceptions are New Zealand, Norway, and
     Sweden. Data missing for South Korea. Part-time includes both voluntary (3.2 percentage points) and involuntary (0.9
     percentage point).
9
     A note on the definition of skills: in this report, we have followed the OECD’s classification of skills (see the technical
     appendix for details). However, it should be noted that in most data sets, skills tend to be measured on the basis of
     credentialed or professionalized skills or of educational attainment. This tends to leave out skilled workers whose skills
     are not measured in this way and not always captured in the data collection. Also, some data sets in our sample measure
     skill while others measure wage. For these reasons, in several places we use these terms interchangeably or as proxies
     for each other to capture the polarization of the labor market in the United States and European Union. Some researchers
     recognize that middle-skill jobs are typically those in the middle of the wage distribution in the United States. OECD
     employment outlook 2017, OECD, 2017; David Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and Proceedings,
     May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32.
10
     OECD employment outlook 2017, OECD, 2017; World Development Indicators, World Bank.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                       5


Exhibit E2

Employment in advanced economies is at historically high levels and has recovered after the
financial crisis in most countries, largely due to rising part-time employment.

Change in employment rate, percent of working-age population (15–64 years), 2000–18
Percentage points1
                                   Full-time         Part-time                 Breakdown not available                       Highest employment rate since 2000 2

                                                                                                                                               2000, %   2018, %

Germany                                                                         2.5                                  7.9                10.3     66        76

Japan                                                                          2.3                        5.7               8.0                  69        77

New Zealand                                                        -0.7                           7.8                       7.1                  70        77

Spain2                                                                     1.3                4.7                    6.0                         57        63

Netherlands                                                -3.7                                     8.8                           5.1            72        77

South Korea3                                                                                                   5.1                               62        67

France                                                                           3.2               1.5     4.7                                   61        66

Austria                                                   -4.2                                      8.9                           4.7            68        73

Finland                                                                        1.8           2.9           4.7                                   68        72

Australia                                                               -0.1           4.8                 4.7                                   69        74

Italy                                                             -1.6                      6.2                       4.7                        54        59

Belgium                                                            0.7                 3.3           3.9                                         61        64

Sweden                                                              -0.5             3.7            3.2                                          74        78

Canada                                                                          2.5        0.4 2.9                                               71        74

United Kingdom                                                                 1.8 0.9 2.7                                                       72        75

Switzerland                                               -4.2                              6.0                      1.8                         78        80

Portugal                                                                         0.1 1.4                                                         68        70
                                                                           1.4

Ireland2                                                                   1.2 0.6                                                               68        69
                                                                   -0.6

Denmark2                                            -0.8         -2.2      1.4                                                                   76        75

Greece2                                   -1.5            -4.1                  2.6                                                              56        55

Norway2                                          -3.0 -1.4 -1.6                                                                                  78        75

United States2              -3.4                   -6.8                              3.4                                                         74        71

Weighted average                                                  -1.4                4.1                2.7                                     68        71

1 Calculated as employed people in working-age population (15–64) as a share of working-age population. Weighted by employment rates for each country by their share
  of total population aged 15 and over.
2 Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Norway, and Spain peaked in 2007–08 , whereas United States peaked in 2000.
3 Employment by full-time and part-time employment is not available for South Korea.

Note: figures may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




6                                        McKinsey Global Institute


0.7%
                        Wage stagnation has been a persistent challenge for many workers (Exhibit E3). Between
                        2000 and 2018, average wages grew just 0.7 percent per year in our 22 countries.11 Although
                        wage growth was positive in 20 out of 22 countries, the average growth rate was less than
                        1 percent over 18 years, and less than half the average annual GDP growth of 1.6 percent
                        during the same period.12 Moreover, wage growth substantially slowed even when comparing
Annual average growth   periods not directly affected by the pre-crisis economic boom and the crisis-related slump:
in real wages between   average real wages grew by 1.6 percent annually between 1995 and 2000, but in 2013–18,
2000 and 2018 in our    growth fell to just 0.7 percent per year. Average real wage growth slowed in 19 out of
22 sample countries     22 countries during the latter period, affecting as many as 200 million workers.13

                        Median income grew even more slowly than wages, by just 0.4 percent annually between
                        2000 and 2016, indicating unequal wage growth across income groups. Our previous
                        research has showed that between 65 and 70 percent of households in 25 advanced
                        economies faced flat or declining real market incomes (wages and income from capital)
                        in the decade including the crisis.14 Relative poverty rates even after taxes and transfers
                        rose between 2000 and 2016; the share of the working-age population earning less than
                        50 percent of household median income increased from 11 percent to 13 percent over that
                        period, equivalent to 14 million people in the 22 countries.

                        Global trends, including technology, globalization, and shifts in industry structure and
                        employment arrangements, underlie many of the labor market changes
                        Work is changing in part because of global trends such as technological innovation and
                        globalization. In the United States and 15 European countries, between 20 and 30 percent of
                        the working-age population, or more than 160 million people, now engages in independent
                        work, with a growing proportion leveraging digital platforms to do so. About 70 percent say
                        they do so by choice.15 Technological innovation has also created new types of work that did
                        not previously exist, from drivers on ride-hailing apps and big data translators to professional
                        video gamers and social media influencers.

                        These trends have been something of a double-edged sword. They have brought favorable
                        outcomes in the aggregate and contributed to overall economic growth and, in some cases,
                        job growth and opportunity creation. The trends have benefited individuals directly and
                        indirectly, specifically as consumers and savers.16 For workers who engage in independent
                        work by choice, digital platforms have created opportunities. At the same time, these trends
                        have contributed to work polarization, and outcomes have been less favorable for some.
                        Growing automation adoption is proving disruptive for many workers, especially in sectors
                        such as manufacturing that are highly susceptible.17 Globalization, especially the build-out of
                        value chains (that is, outsourcing) and the labor-cost arbitrage that sometimes accompanied
                        it at the start of the 21st century, has taken a toll on some occupations and workers in
                        advanced economies. More recently, the latter trend has started to shift as the proportion of
                        globalization driven by low-cost labor arbitrage has declined in the aggregate.

                        Accompanying these disruptive trends is a shift in employment arrangements that made
                        labor markets more flexible and increased the responsibility of individual workers for their



                        11
                             The US private sector Job Quality Index compares the number of jobs paying above and below the weekly average wage,
                             called high-quality and low-quality jobs, respectively. The concentration of high-quality jobs declined from 94.9 in 1990
                             to 79.0 in July 2019, and the average wage gap between high- and low-quality jobs has widened since 2004. See Daniel
                             Alpert et al., The US private sector Job Quality Index, Cornell Law School, November 2019.
                        12
                             World Economic Outlook database, IMF, October 2019.
                        13
                             Estimated as 37 percent of the working-age population (share of middle-wage, middle-income occupations based on
                             16 European countries and the United States). Excludes Germany, New Zealand, and South Korea, where growth was
                             positive.
                        14
                             Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in advanced economies, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2016.
                        15
                             Independent work: Choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2016.
                        16
                             See Globalization in transition: The future of trade and value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2019; “Tech for
                             Good”: Smoothing disruption, improving well-being, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019; David H. Autor, David Dorn,
                             and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China shock: Learning from labor-market adjustment to large changes in trade,” Annual
                             Review of Economics, October 2016, Volume 8.
                        17
                             Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets, NBER working paper number
                             23285, March 2017.




                        The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     7


Exhibit E3

Average real wages stagnated while relative poverty increased.

                                                                                     CAGR                          Change in relative poverty rate
                               Change in 5-year CAGR of real                         1995–         CAGR            after taxes and transfers, share
                               average wages,1 1995–2000 vs                          2000,         2000–           of working-age population,2
                               2013–18, percentage points                              %            18, %          2000–16, percentage points       2000, %3

South Korea                                                                1.5          0.6            1.7                                 1.6                         11.1

New Zealand                                                             1.2             0.4            1.6                        0.4                                  9.3

Germany                                                              0.8                0.7           0.8                                              3.5             6.7

Denmark                                                   -0.1                          1.3            1.3                                       2.6                   4.4

Japan                                                 -0.2                              0.3           0.0                       0.0                                    13.6

Spain                                                 -0.3                             -0.1           0.2                                                              NA

Netherlands                                          -0.3                               0.2           0.5                                        2.5                   6.3

Austria                                              -0.4                              0.8            0.6                            0.8                               8.8

France                                               -0.4                               1.1           1.0                                1.5                           7.0

Italy                                               -0.7                                0.9           0.1                                            3.2               10.7

Switzerland                                     -0.9                                    0.9           0.8                                                              NA

Belgium                                       -1.4                                      1.4           0.2                                      2.3                     7.0

Finland                                       -1.4                                      1.8           1.0                                  1.7                         5.5

United States                               -1.7                                        2.8           0.9                                  1.8                         13.7

Canada                                   -1.9                                           2.2            1.2                       0.2                                   12.2

Australia                              -2.2                                             2.0           0.9             -0.3                                             9.7

Norway                               -2.4                                               2.6           2.0                                              3.5             6.0

Sweden                             -2.6                                                 3.6            1.5                                             3.4             5.2

Portugal                          -2.7                                                  2.5          -0.2                                1.5                           11.1

Ireland                          -2.9                                                   3.4            1.5         -0.9                                                10.8

United Kingdom                   -2.9                                                   3.2           0.8                          0.5                                 9.6

Greece                          -3.0                                                    3.3          -0.2                                                    5.1       10.3

Weighted average4                                  -0.9                                 1.6           0.7                                  1.7                         11.1




1   N=22. Compound annual growth rate (CAGR) for average wages represents 5 years ending with date listed (e.g., 1995–2000 for 2000). Average wages are in 2018
    dollars, which have been converted using average exchange rate for 2018 and CPI for 2018.
2   Poverty rate after taxes and transfers is measured as share of working age population whose income falls below 50 percent of median household income of total
    population. Definition of poverty rate changes in 2012. To create a long time series, income definition prior to 2011 was used until 2011 and new income definition was
    used after 2012. Exceptions are Austria, Canada, and Finland, for which new income definition is available earlier than 2012. Data availability by country varies. Figures
    for most countries cover 2000–16. Exceptions are: Austria, 2007–16; Belgium, Portugal, Greece, 2004–16 ; Denmark, 2000–15; Finland, Norway, Sweden, 2000–17;
    Ireland, 2004–15; Japan, 2000–15; South Korea, 2006–17; New Zealand, 2000–14.
3   2000 or earliest year available.
4   Weighted average is average of full set of countries weighted by their share of total population aged 15 and over.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




8                                             McKinsey Global Institute


                          own employment and wage outcomes. For example, employment protection that governs the
                          dismissal of regular workers and hiring of temporary workers has decreased over the past
                          two decades, according to OECD research. Some argue that reducing employment protection
                          increases the flexibility of labor markets, since it enables firms to respond quickly to changes
                          in the business environment while also enabling workers to find jobs that best match their
                          skills.18 However, lower employment protection is likely to make workers more vulnerable to
                          job displacement during difficult economic times and could lead to lower investment in the
                          current workforce, thereby reducing the growth of good jobs.19 Wage negotiation mechanisms
                          have also been changing: the share of workers governed by collective agreements declined
                          in 14 of our 22 countries, by five percentage points on average, with the most significant
                          declines in Germany, Greece, and Ireland.20

                          In addition to technology, globalization, and changes in employment arrangements, other
                          factors have also played a role. These include a shifting balance between capital and labor,
                          the growing role of intangibles such as intellectual property products, changes in industry
                          structure, mix, and performance, and “superstar” effects, as a small proportion of large firms
                          captures a larger share of income. For example, the labor share of income has been declining
                          in advanced economies; in the United States, it fell by 5.4 percentage points between
                          1998–2002 and 2012–16. Had this decline not occurred, the average worker would be paid
                          $3,000 more in real terms.21


                          For consumers, discretionary goods and services are cheaper,
                          but cost of housing and other basics has risen
                          The past two decades have seen strongly contrasting outcomes for individuals as consumers.
                          We assessed nine goods and services in some detail: communications, clothing, recreation,
                          and furnishings, consumption of which is primarily discretionary in nature; transportation and
                          food, which are both discretionary and basic; and housing, healthcare, and education, which
                          are primarily basic in nature. While the cost of discretionary goods and services has been
                          falling and creating consumer surplus, the cost of basics—especially housing, which accounts
                          for 24 percent of household consumption—has risen much faster than general consumer
                          prices and is absorbing a substantial part of households’ income. Given that the ratio of
                          discretionary goods to basics varies across income groups, this is particularly challenging for
                          lower-income individuals (often young or old).




~90%
                          For most discretionary goods and services, availability has expanded, costs have fallen,
                          and consumer surplus has risen
                          Prices for clothing, communications, recreation, and furnishings are falling relative to general
                          consumer prices in all regions (Exhibit E4).22 Holding all else constant (volume of goods
Decline in cost of data   and services consumed, prices of other goods and services, and wages in real terms), the
between 2012 and 2017,    average person can work six fewer weeks a year and still consume the same amount of these
as usage surged tenfold   categories as in 2000 in ten sample countries. This has drastically improved affordability
                          and access, leading to expanded consumption of discretionary goods and services; for
                          instance, between 2012 and 2017, the cost of data fell by almost 90 percent and usage surged
                          tenfold in nine countries in our sample.23 Food costs tracked general consumer prices, while
                          transportation costs were higher in Europe but lower in the United States.




                          18
                               See “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation,” in OECD employment
                               outlook 2013, OECD, 2013.
                          19
                               Dani Rodrik and Charles Sabel, Building a good jobs economy, working paper, November 2019.
                          20
                               Collective agreements are legal agreements negotiated at the firm, sector, or national level that cover mutually agreed-
                               upon wage levels, wage increases, and nonworking conditions such as vacation arrangements, training, and employment
                               protections, among other factors.
                          21
                               A new look at the declining labor share of income in the United States, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019.
                          22
                               As measured by the all-items Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices calculated by Eurostat for 15 European economies
                               in our sample and the United States. The index attempts to capture quality changes, but the European Central Bank says,
                               “Work is underway … to ensure that all countries use comparable techniques for quality adjustment.”
                          23
                               Strategic Analytics, 2018.




                          The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     9


     Technology has helped unlock new consumption in discretionary categories. Some of it
     takes the form of “free” services for consumers, such as social media, communications, and
     information services (although consumers often pay for these services through providing their
     personal data and through advertising costs factored into the prices of goods and services).
     The combination of falling prices and improving quality has led to an increase in consumer
     surplus, the wedge between what consumers are willing to pay and what they actually pay for
     goods and services.24

     Globalization has increased competition in traded goods such as clothing and electronics, as
     China, Vietnam, and other emerging economies have become key lower-cost manufacturing
     centers. This has led to significant price improvements, greater choice, and increased
     availability for consumers in advanced economies that are the focus of this research.

     Institutional moves to deregulate markets for some discretionary goods and the reduction
     of trade barriers to allow for greater competition have played a role in improving economic
     outcomes for consumers. Between 2000 and 2013, the OECD index for product-market
     regulation fell in telecommunications, transportation, and utilities by 33 percent on average
     for 22 advanced economies.25 Overall, price declines were steepest in markets that are most
     exposed to technology, globalization, and deregulation, such as communications, while
     sectors less exposed to these trends have improved less significantly.

     The cost of housing and, in some countries, education and healthcare has soared,
     absorbing much of the income gains for many
     Unlike the cost of many discretionary goods, the costs of housing, healthcare, and education
     have risen faster than general consumer prices across countries in our sample, meaning that
     the same consumption level requires a higher share of income.26 Holding all else constant,
     consumers in ten countries in our sample would have to work an average of an additional four
     weeks a year (ranging from zero in Japan to ten weeks in Australia) to consume the same
     amount of housing, healthcare, and education that they did two decades ago. Basics that have
     risen the most have tended to be non-traded or in markets with significant supply constraints
     that limit competitive dynamics.

     Housing is the primary cause of this loss in purchasing power in most countries since it
     accounts for about one-fourth of consumption spending on average (ranging between
     17 and 28 percent).27 Housing costs have increased significantly in almost all 20 countries for
     which data are available, accounting for 39 percent of the change on average in 15 European
     countries and the United States between 2002 and 2018. Japan and South Korea were the
     exceptions; housing costs there tracked general consumer prices.

     Healthcare prices increased sharply in Australia and the United States. In the United States,
     healthcare represents 9 percent of spending and is the second most significant driver of the
     change in consumer prices, accounting for 17 percent. In Europe, where private spending
     on healthcare is lower, healthcare constituted just 3 percent of the change in consumer
     prices. Education costs jumped in all countries except Japan, and almost doubled in the




     24
          For example, the OECD has estimated that quality and price changes in the broadband market from 2006 to 2010
          increased consumer surplus by $1,035 per subscriber on average for the 22 countries. Shane Greenstein and Ryan
          McDevitt, Measuring the broadband bonus in thirty OECD countries, OECD, 2012. National income statistics do not
          include free services, so consumption of discretionary goods and services may be higher in reality. See Hal Varian, “The
          value of the internet now and in the future,” Economist, March 10, 2013.
     25
          The index measures product-market regulation on a scale of 0 to 6; the average of sector indexes fell from 3.1 to 2.1.
          Methodology for 2018 data has been changed and is not comparable to earlier periods.
     26
          Consumer prices of housing include actual rentals, maintenance, and utilities, and exclude housing purchases or
          imputed rents (although house prices, rents, and mortgage interest costs could move differently over short periods, the
          relationship is strong in the long run). Healthcare consumer prices include medical products, outpatient services, and
          hospital services, and exclude health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services). Education consumer
          prices include pre-primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary, and tertiary education as well as education not
          definable by level.
     27
          On average, home ownership is 66 percent in our country sample, from a low of 43 percent in Switzerland to a high of 83
          percent in Norway.




10   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit E4

Consumer prices of discretionary goods and services such as communications fell
significantly, while basics such as housing outpaced general consumer prices in 15 European
countries and the United States, and Japan witnessed relatively moderate variations.
                                                                                                                                                          Share of
Category consumer price vs all-items consumer price index                                                                                                 spending
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) and consumer price index (CPI),                                                                                   %
2002–18, indexed to 2002, percentage points

                           60
                                                                                                                      48         Education                      1
                           40
                                                                                                                      24         Housing                       24
                           20                                                                                         15         Other                         23
                                                                                                                      12         Transportation                14
                                                                                                                      5          Healthcare                     4
15 European                  0                                                                                        1          Food                          11
countries1
                                                                                                                      -15        Furnishings                    6
                          -20
                                                                                                                      -27        Recreation                     9
                                                                                                                      -36        Clothing                       5
                          -40
                                                                                                                      -48        Communications                 3
                          -60
                                 2002       04        06        08        10         12       14        16      2018

                           60

                           40

                                                                                                                       10        Food                          14
                           20                                                                                           7        Transportation                10
                                                                                                                        1        Clothing                       3
Japan
                             0                                                                                          1        Healthcare                     4
                                                                                                                      -4         Education                      2
                                                                                                                      -6         Housing                       26
                          -20                                                                                         -14        Recreation                     8
                                                                                                                      -24        Communications                 3
                          -40                                                                                         -28        Furnishings                    5

                          -60
                                 2002       04        06        08        10         12       14        16      2018
                                                                                                                      70         Education                      3
                           60

                           40
                                                                                                                      35         Healthcare                    9
                                                                                                                      26         Housing                       25
                           20                                                                                         22         Others                        13
United States
                             0                                                                                        -2         Food                          8
                                                                                                                      -8         Transportation                19
                          -20
                                                                                                                      -35        Clothing                       4
                                                                                                                      -36        Recreation                     8
                          -40                                                                                         -44        Communications                 3
                                                                                                                      -46        Furnishings                    8
                          -60
                                 2002       04        06        08        10         12       14        16      2018
1 Consumption-weighted average of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and
  United Kingdom (data not included for Switzerland).
Note: Value of 0 can be interpreted as “consumer prices in this category match all-items consumer price index.” Others category includes alcohol and tobacco, restaurants
  and hotels, and miscellaneous goods and services (omitted for Japan due to missing data, representing 25% of consumption). Housing includes actual rentals,
  maintenance, and utilities but excludes housing purchases or imputed rents. Healthcare includes medical products, outpatient services, and hospital services; but
  excludes health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services). Education includes pre-primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary,
  and tertiary education, and education not definable by level.
Source: Eurostat; Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices; Japan Statistics Bureau; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     11


                              United Kingdom partly due to cuts in university fee subsidies that started in 2010; however,
                              education accounts for just 2 percent of total consumption spending on average.

                              The increase in housing, healthcare, and education spending for consumers absorbed income
                              gains to varying degrees in ten of our 22 countries between 2000 and 2017 (Exhibit E5). In
                              countries where incomes increased (albeit more slowly than they had in the past), the largest
                              erosion—107 percent of incremental income—was in the United Kingdom, meaning that the
                              gains in income have been entirely absorbed by increased spending on basic goods and
                              services.28 In France, these price increases absorbed 87 percent of income gains. In countries
                              where incomes declined —Italy, Japan, and Spain—increased spending on basics further
                              eroded incomes by 6 to 29 percent.



1.1 pp
                              Rising costs of basics have come with improvements in some aspects of quality
                              Although data on quality of goods and services are often not comprehensive and can be
                              difficult to measure, some evidence suggests improving outcomes. For example, housing
                              overcrowding rates fell, albeit marginally, by 1.1 percentage points on average over the past
Decrease in housing
                              two decades for our 22 countries.29 Healthcare has seen major improvements: life expectancy
overcrowding rates on
                              at 65 has increased from 18 to 20 years, mortality from cancer decreased by an average of
average in the 22 countries
                              15 percent between 2000 and 2016, and diabetes mortality declined by 20 percent between
                              2000 and 2015. 30 Technology promises to drive further improvements, with innovations such
                              as predictive diagnosis algorithms, health monitor implants, and synthetic biology.

                              Access to education has also improved. Tertiary attainment rates increased from 28 to
                              42 percent of the 25- to 64-year-old population between 2000 and 2017, equivalent
                              to more than 155 million people. The largest increases were in Ireland and South Korea,
                              at 24 percentage points. Innovations and online courses have democratized access to
                              knowledge. However, PISA scores for reading, science, and mathematics declined by
                              2 percent on average between 2000 and 2018. 31


                              Individual and institutional savings have declined at a time when they
                              matter more
                              Increasing longevity and declining birth rates are making saving for retirement both a greater
                              imperative and a greater challenge. While access to and variety of saving and investment
                              options have expanded, many households are not saving at all, and median wealth growth has
                              been falling.

                              Improved life expectancy and aging are challenging both institutional and
                              individual savings
                              As people live longer due to scientific and technological progress, the number of expected
                              years spent in retirement in our 22 sample countries has increased, from 16 in 1980 to 20 in
                              2018. 32 These gains and expansions in productive working life are a hallmark of progress in the
                              21st century, yet they also pose a considerable challenge for both institutional and individual
                              savers. Institutional pensions, whether provided by the public sector or by employers, will
                              need to adjust to higher pension payouts and lower receipts, even after accounting for longer
                              working lives. Individual savers will need to save more for themselves for their longer lives
                              and to compensate for the shortfall in institutional saving. Although attractive investment
                              opportunities are needed to ensure that individuals build their savings, the current economic



                              28
                                   For income, we consider the OECD data on household net adjusted disposable income, which includes wages and
                                   salaries, property income, social benefits in cash, and social transfers in kind (which also include healthcare-related
                                   transfers). The breakdown of household consumption is based on OECD national accounts data, which includes only
                                   household spending (excluding government spending) on various categories, including healthcare. See the technical
                                   appendix for details.
                              29
                                   OECD Affordable Housing database, 2019. Overcrowding is defined as the minimum number of rooms required for each
                                   couple, single adult, and child. See the technical appendix.
                              30
                                   Global Burden of Disease Collaborative Network, 2016; OECD Health statistics, 2019.
                              31
                                   OECD Education database, 2019.
                              32
                                   Expected number of years in retirement, OECD Employment database, 2019.




12                            McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit E5

A significant amount of income gains was spent on basic goods and services,
primarily housing.

Income and spending changes for average households, 2000 –171
Indexed to income in starting year, %

                  Income                   Share of income change spent on basics,2                                                             Total share of
                  change,                  2000–17                                                                   Final income               income change
                  2000–17                  Housing          Healthcare         Education                             change, 2017               spent on basics2
                     100 = $7
United
                                                                                                                                                          107
Kingdom
                                                   -81                       -8                       -18                        -7
                     100 = $6
France                                                                                                                                                     87
                                                                                                                                 13
                                                   -75                      -10                        -2

United              100 = $29
     100                                                                                                                        46                         54
States                                             -18
       0                                                                    -34                        -3
        -100
   -200             100 = $29
     100
Australia                                                                                                                       46                         54
        0                                         -33                        -11                      -10
        -100
   -200             100 = $16
    100                                                                                                                          57
Germany                                                                                                                                                    43
      0                                           -32                        -8                        -2
        -100
   -200             100 = $29
    100                                                                                                                          62
Canada                                                                                                                                                     38
       0                                           -27                       -8                        -4
        -100
                    100 = $48
    100
   -200                                                                                                                          74
Sweden                                                                                                                                                     26
      0                                           -24                        -1                        -0

        -100
         100
   -2000
Spain                                                                                                                                                      29
    -100
                   -100 = -$15                    -26                                                  -1
     -200                                                                    -3                                                -129
      100
       0
Japan                                                                                                   3                                                  11
    -100
                    -100 = -$7                     -9                        -5                                                 -111
     -200
      100
          0
Italy                                                                         2                         1                                                   6
        -100
                   -100 = -$18                     -8                                                                          -106
     -200



1 Values expressed in real terms (i.e., adjusted for general consumer price increase). Starting date for Australia and Spain is 2001. Germany, Japan, Sweden, and UK
  databased on an average of results from OECD national accounts and household budget surveys (UK income change is based only on household budget survey due to
  data inconsistencies); figures for remaining countries are based on OECD national accounts due to data availability.
2 We defined basic goods and services as housing, healthcare, and education.

Note: Household incomes rose between 2000 and 2017 in some countries. Household income can be affected by changes in tax rates or government transfers and
  incorporates other forms of income such as capital income. All of these factors can contribute to a rise in household income (incremental income) while growth in wages
  and salaries is low or negative. Not to scale. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
Source: OECD national accounts data; Eurostat household budget surveys; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     13


     climate and the much-debated topic of secular stagnation raise questions about whether this
     is feasible. 33

     In response, more than half of OECD countries have raised the statutory retirement age, and
     some, including Denmark, Finland, Italy, and Sweden, now explicitly link the retirement age
     to life expectancy. By 2060 the normal retirement age will approach 66, which represents an
     increase of 1.5 years for men and 2.1 years for women compared with 2015. 34 Life expectancy
     has been increasing at a faster rate, however, which means that the proportion of an average
     life spent in retirement will continue to rise.

     Governments and private-sector institutions concerned about fiscal sustainability have taken
     action over the past two decades to shift a larger responsibility to individuals for their own
     retirement savings. The net pension replacement rate that an average worker can expect
     to receive from her or his mandatory pension has decreased by 11 percentage points for
     the average person in our 22-country sample. 35 Net replacement rates, which measure how
     effectively a pension system provides a retirement income to replace preretirement earnings,
     now range from 92 percent in Italy to just 28 percent in the United Kingdom. Individuals need
     to increase their private savings in order to meet the net replacement rates provided by the
     government or private-sector employers in the early 2000s (Exhibit E6).

     Many pension systems have changed from defined-benefit plans, for which institutions
     guarantee a minimum return and thus bear the market risk, to defined-contribution ones,
     for which individuals bear the market risk. 36 In 17 countries on average, the share of assets
     under management in defined-contribution plans rose by two percentage points between
     2007 and 2017. 37 Countries that faced the largest decreases in the share of defined-benefit
     assets include Italy, which saw a drop of 13 percentage points, from 30 to 17 percent, and the
     United States, where assets dropped 11 percentage points, from 53 to 42 percent. This also
     raises the importance of financial literacy, particularly as financial products have become
     more complex. 38

     To compensate for the extended period in retirement and decreasing institutional savings in
     most countries, household private savings would need to increase. However, with widespread
     stagnation in wage and income growth in many economies and the increasing cost of
     basics, the household saving rate has fallen in half of our sample countries by more than five
     percentage points since 2000. 39 Moreover, household saving is concentrated on a subset of
     all households: across a broad range of our sample countries, surveys show that more than
     half of individuals did not save for old age in 2017, and a quarter did not save any money at all
     (Exhibit E7). 40 In France, Italy, and Spain, over two-thirds of adults did not save for old age in
     2017. Similarly, 40 percent of Americans cannot come up with $400 in an emergency. 41




     33
          Secular stagnation, first proposed by Alvin Hansen in the 1930s, is a theory that says demographic factors are driving
          slower economic growth. Lawrence Summers, after the 2008 financial crisis, cited it in explaining the slow post-crisis
          recovery in advanced economies. However, others such as Ben Bernanke dispute Summers’s theory, arguing that
          a global savings glut is the driving force behind the slow recovery. See Lawrence H. Summers, “The age of secular
          stagnation: What it is and what to do about it,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2016; Ben S. Bernanke, Why interest rates are
          so low, part 3: The global savings glut, Brookings Institution, April 1, 2015.
     34
          Pensions at a glance, OECD, 2017
     35
          The OECD defines the net pension replacement rate as the individual net pension entitlement divided by net
          preretirement earnings, taking into account personal income taxes and social security contributions paid by workers and
          pensioners.
     36
          Defined-benefit pensions provide a guaranteed payment in retirement, typically based on an employee’s salary and the
          length of time worked for an employer. Defined-contribution pensions depend on the amount of money paid into the
          scheme by an employee or an employer and the rate of return on investment.
     37
          Simple average. Weighting by assets under management would increase the ratio to six percentage points due to the
          disproportionate size of the United States market.
     38
          Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell, The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory and evidence, National
          Bureau of Economic Research working paper number 18952, April 2013.
     39
          National accounts at a glance, OECD 2019.
     40
          The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring financial inclusion and the fintech revolution, World Bank, 2018.
     41
          Lawrence H. Summers, “Do Americans really need to be more thrifty?,” Washington Post, January 7, 2020.




14   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit E6

Net replacement rates from mandatory pensions have declined in 16 out of 22 countries by
an average of 11 percentage points, and net pension wealth covers just ten years on average.

                                Net replacement rate from mandatory pensions1

                                Change, 2004–18                                  2004,       2018,        Net pension wealth, 20182                         Expected years in
                                Percentage points                                 %            %          Years                                             retirement, 20183

Greece                         -49                                               100           51                                   11                              24

Canada                           -44                                              95           51                                  10                               21

United Kingdom                     -42                                            70           28                      6                                            21

Switzerland                                 -24                                   68           44                              9                                    21

Japan                                        -22                                  59           37                          8                                        18

Germany                                       -20                                 72           52                                   11                              21

Sweden                                            -15                             68           53                                  10                               20

Finland                                           -15                             79           64                                       12                          21

Norway                                             -14                            65           52                                  10                               20

Australia                                           -11                           52           41                          7                                        22

Spain                                                     -5                      88           83                                            14                     24

Netherlands                                               -4                      84           80                                             15                    21

Austria                                                   -3                      93           90                                                      17           22

United States                                              -2                     51           49                              9                                    18

South Korea                                                -1                     44           43                              9                                    15

Ireland                                                    -1                     37           36                          7                                        20

Italy                                                             3               89           92                                                 15                23

Belgium                                                           3               63           66                                        12                         23

New Zealand                                                       3               40           43                                  10                               18

France                                                             5              69           74                                             14                    25

Portugal                                                               10         80           90                                             15                    19

Denmark                                                                     17    54           71                                  10                               20

Weighted average                                    -11                           65           54                                  10                               20




1   Net replacement rate for mandatory pensions for male workers; data missing for female workers prior to 2010. Net pension replacement rate is identical for men and
    women except in Australia (2010–18), Switzerland (2018), and Austria (2004).
2   Net pension wealth is present value of flow of pension benefits, taking account of taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is
    affected by life expectancy and by age at which people take their pensions, as well by as indexation rules. This indicator is measured as a simple average of multiple of
    annual net earnings for men and women. Assumes individuals consume their average net earnings each year in retirement.
3   Expected years in retirement for both men and women taken as a simple average of male and female expected years in retirement.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                              The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                          15


Exhibit E7

Over half of individuals in advanced economies did not save for old age, a quarter did
not save any money, and 20 percent do not have enough wealth to cover six months of
basic costs.
                           Did not save for                     Did not save any              Share of individuals with net wealth compared
                           old age                              money                         with income poverty line (Percent, 2014)
                           Percent of population                Percent of population         <25%                    <50%
                           aged 15+ years, 2017                 aged 15+ years, 2017          (3-month buffer)        (6-month buffer)

Greece                                                    92                            79          13                       17

Spain                                                74                       32                9                        10

Italy                                               69                         38                10                          14

France                                             68                         37                    12                       17

Portugal                                           68                              45               14                       16

Finland                                         61                        28                         17                      20

Ireland                                        60                           28                           27                       30

South Korea                                    58                             31                5                       7

United Kingdom                                 57                         26                    6                        9

Netherlands                                    57                        21                                   39                       43

Denmark                                     50                         20                                 34                       39

Australia                                   50                           21                     6                        9

Japan                                      49                            22                      10                       12

Belgium                                    48                               30                      11                      14

United States                             46                             21                              25                       30

Germany                                   45                             24                              22                       28

Austria                                   43                           20                           14                       19

Sweden                                    43                           17

Canada                                   41                            20                       8                         12

New Zealand                              40                          14                          10                         14

Switzerland                             39                             18

Norway                                  39                          10                                   25                       27

Weighted average                              53                          26                         16                      20


Source: World Bank Financial Inclusion Indicators; OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




16                                         McKinsey Global Institute


                                Opportunities to save have expanded, but savings and returns have been low for many,
                                and indebtedness has risen
                                For those who do save, the internet has made saving, tracking, and investing wealth easier.
                                Technology and the opening up of global markets have created many more opportunities,
                                providers, products, and available services, and often at lower cost. Digital banking, digital
                                savings, and new fintech products such as robo-advisers mean that good-quality investment
                                advice is increasingly available with lower minimum deposit thresholds and lower fees. 42

                                However, returns on investment have been low for many households, largely due to low
                                productivity growth and low interest rates in most advanced economies. Personal wealth
                                growth has been low or even negative since 2000 for about 170 million people (or 21 percent
                                of the population over 15) in our 22 sample countries. 43 These are likely to be the same people
                                who see the increasing cost of basics absorbing a large portion of their income gains.

                                While real mean individual net wealth has recovered to pre-crisis levels in many countries, real
                                median net wealth has not recovered in 13 countries since the financial crisis; it declined from
                                $104,371 to $80,659 on average in our 22 sample countries between 2007 and 2018 and
                                has only just started to rise again. 44 Growth in real mean net wealth has also been sluggish
                                since the crisis: annual growth has been close to zero for most of the post-crisis period. In the
                                22 countries in our sample, between 2015 and 2017 the real growth rate for mean net wealth
                                was just 1 percent per year, and it was negative in seven countries (Belgium, Canada, Finland,
                                Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United Kingdom).

                                Lower-wealth households are particularly affected. They often lack access to higher-return
                                capital market instruments, as their lack of financial capital means they cannot bear the risk.
                                For example, in France, return on assets and portfolios for the bottom wealth decile was
                                negative 0.2 percent between 1970 and 2014, compared with a positive 6.4 percent for the
                                top wealth decile. Similarly, the bottom five deciles in the United States earned returns of
                                between negative 1.9 and positive 0.8 percent, compared with 2.0 to 6.0 percent for the top
                                five deciles. 45




23%
                                The proportion of individuals with zero or negative net worth has risen significantly in recent
                                decades. In the United States, for example, the share of households with zero or negative net
                                worth rose to 23 percent in 2017 from 16 percent in 2001. In some countries, debt has also
                                become a more significant issue; on average, 13 percent of households are heavily indebted,
Share of US households with     with debt-to-asset ratios above 75 percent in 2014. The real net wealth of the bottom decile in
zero or negative net worth in   the United States fell from negative $23,240 to negative $69,408 between 1999 and 2017. 46
2017, up from 16% in 2001
                                Young people between 15 and 30 years old, who make up about 180 million individuals in our
                                sample countries, are especially affected. In France, in 1970, the average 30-year-old had
                                61 percent of average adult wealth; by 2010, that had almost halved to 32 percent. 47 In the
                                United States, the equivalent figures for the average 30- to 34-year-old were 69 percent
                                in 1984 and just 31 percent in 2017. In the United Kingdom, some 53 percent of people
                                aged 22 to 29 had no savings. Of those who did, about 40 percent had less than £1,000 in
                                the bank. 48


                                42
                                     The new dynamics of financial globalization, McKinsey Global Institute, August 2017; Jill E. Fisch, Marion Laboré, and
                                     John A. Turner, “The emergence of the robo-advisor,” in The Disruptive Impact of FinTech on Retirement Systems, Julie
                                     Agnew and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds.,Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, August 2019.
                                43
                                     Assumes that 47 percent of the population over 15 saved for old age, on average in 22 countries, based on World Bank
                                     Financial Inclusion Indicators data. Of these, 50 percent have low or negative wealth growth in countries in which median
                                     wealth growth has been less than 1 percent since 2000, and 20 percent in countries with median wealth growth greater
                                     than 1 percent; calculated using wealth data from Credit Suisse, Global wealth databook 2018, 2018.
                                44
                                     Credit Suisse, Global wealth databook 2018, 2018. Deflated using the OECD CPI deflator.
                                45
                                     Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use data set. Produced and distributed by the Survey Research Center, Institute
                                     for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2019.
                                46
                                     The extremely indebted households in the bottom decile differ from households in the second decile in a number of ways;
                                     they tend to be younger, to be better educated, and to have higher incomes.
                                47
                                     Bertrand Garbinti, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty, Accounting for wealth inequality dynamics: Methods,
                                     estimates and simulations for France (1800–2014), WID.world working paper series number 2016/5, World Inequality
                                     Database, 2016.
                                48
                                     How well are you doing compared with other young people?, UK Office of National Statistics, October 2019.



                                The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     17


     Institutions have shifted responsibility for outcomes to individuals
     Across the three arenas, changes in outcomes for individuals are propelled not only by
     disruptive global trends and slow GDP growth since the global financial crisis, but also by
     the evolution of the social contract itself, through the changing roles of public- and private-
     sector institutions, and interventions that shape individual or institutional responsibility for
     economic outcomes.

     We developed two composite indexes to understand the role of institutions in the social
     contract and how these roles have shifted over the past two decades. The first gauges the
     extent to which institutions are intervening in the marketplace to manage market outcomes
     for individuals. The second focuses on the extent to which government spending cushions
     individual economic outcomes. Putting the indicators for market intervention and public-
     sector spending together highlights movements in the social contract. 49

     Exhibit E8 summarizes the shifts in both indexes at an aggregate level, and Exhibit E9 shows
     the shifts for each country. Our results suggest that in 19 out of 22 countries, institutions
     are intervening less in the marketplace, while governments in 18 out of 22 countries have
     somewhat stepped up their spending. 50 Some of the biggest changes in the extent of market
     intervention are a decline in employment protection for workers on temporary contracts, a
     substantial reduction in product-market regulations, and a sharp fall in the net replacement
     rate for mandatory pensions. In public-sector spending, the biggest change came from
     pensions, for which public spending in the 22 countries rose by 1.9 percentage points on
     average. This in turn was almost entirely a function of demographic change, namely longer
     life spans. Healthcare spending also rose by 1.1 percentage points; aging explains about
     30 percent of that increase.

     On average, market intervention by institutions declined by 13 points, while public-sector
     spending increased by three percentage points of GDP. This shift to lower market intervention
     and increased public-sector spending occurred in 15 out of 22 countries. The direction is
     broadly consistent, independent of the starting point of a country’s institutional setup, for
     three groups of countries: (1) countries where both market intervention and public spending
     are high, such as Austria, Belgium, France, and the Scandinavian countries; (2) countries
     where intervention is high and public spending middling, such as Germany and the
     Netherlands; and (3) countries where market intervention is lower and public spending is also
     relatively low. This latter set includes Japan, South Korea, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
     and the United States.

     This general trend toward lower market intervention has had significant implications for
     individuals, especially as workers and savers, given the role that institutions have played
     historically in cushioning individual outcomes in these two arenas. Workers find they need to
     seek employment in an increasingly flexible market, negotiate terms individually, and adapt to
     work fragility. As institutions are less able to provide generous retirement benefits, individuals
     find they need to actively prepare for retirement and manage their own assets.

     Some individuals are choosing to take responsibility for their own outcomes and have been
     able to take advantage of the opportunities created by these institutional shifts, such as
     the expansion of new technology-enabled work opportunities. But many individuals have
     not been able to adapt to the profound changes in the social contract and face challenging
     economic outcomes as a consequence.


     49
          We drew on research that distinguishes between different degrees of “coordinated” versus “liberal” market economies—
          that is, the institutional arrangements that govern how actors such as firms and employees interact with one another. In
          liberal market economies, firms and market mechanisms primarily drive exchanges between individuals and institutions,
          including in such areas as industrial relations, vocational training and education, corporate governance, interfirm
          relations, and relations with employees. More coordinated market economies rely more heavily on nonmarket forms of
          interaction. These can include factors such as employee protection and coordinated provision of vocational training. See
          Peter Hall and David Soskice, eds., Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage,
          Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001; and Gøsta Esping-Andersen, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism,
          Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990.
     50
          Indicators for this included the level of public-sector wages, active labor market programs, and government spending on
          training; spending on housing, healthcare, education, infrastructure, and family and other social policies; and pension
          spending.




18   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit E8

The role of institutions changed for workers, consumers, and savers.

Simple average of 22 countries
                                                                        Change in public-sector spending, 2000 and
Change in market intervention by institutions,                          2018 (or latest)
2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest); Indexed to 2000 = 100          Percent of GDP
                                                     Less    More
                                              coordinated    coordinated               Split of spending explained
                                                 markets     markets                   by demographics

Workers            Employment protection
                                                                                     -7           Public-sector wages                           0.1
                   (permanent contracts)

                   Employment protection
                                                                             -15                  Unemployment,
                   (temporary contracts)
                                                                                                  incapacity, and active               -0.0
                                                                                                  labor market programs
                   Collective agreements coverage                                  -8

                                                                                                  Training                             -0.0
                   Workers subindex (simple
                                                                                  -10
                   average of 3 components)

Consumers Product market regulations for                                                          Workers subtotal
                                                 -33                                                                                            0.1
          telecom, transportation, and utilities                                                  (sum of 3 components)


                   Retail price controls                               -26                        Family and other social
                                                                                                  policy                                           0.5

                   Housing: social rental housing
                   stock                                                             -5
                                                                                                  Infrastructure: gross fixed
                                                                                                                              -0.4
                                                                                                  capital formation
                   Housing: intensity of rent control                              -8

                                                                                                  Housing: social spending                      0.0
                   Healthcare: level of market
                                                                             -15
                   intervention in healthcare1

                                                                                                  Healthcare: social                                  0.3
                   Education: level of market                                                                                                               1.1
                                                                      -27                         spending                                      0.8
                   intervention in education1

                   Consumers subindex (simple                                                     Education: public-sector
                                                                            -19                                                                               0.3
                   average of 6 components)                                                       spending

Savers             Net replacement rate from
                                                                             -15
                   mandatory pensions                                                             Consumers subtotal                                    0.3
                                                                                                                                                              1.3
                                                                                                  (sum of 5 components)                          1.0
                   Proportion of defined-benefits
                                                                                        -3
                   assets under management
                                                                                                  Savers subtotal                                        0.1 1.8        1.9
                   Savers subindex (simple
                                                                                   -9
                   average of 2 components)

                                                                                                  Public-sector spending                          1.2             2.1   3.3
                   Market intervention by institutions                         -13                on workers, consumers,
                   (simple average of 3 subindexes)
                                                                                                  and savers


1 Index to proxy role of institutions: inverse of out-of-pocket voluntary spending in healthcare, and private spending.
Note: Direction of some indicators flipped to show positive/negative outcome.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; ILO; national accounts data; national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index;
         McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                       19


Exhibit E9

Market intervention for workers, consumers, and savers declined by 13 points, although
public-sector spending increased by three percentage points on average.

Social contract archetypes for 22 OECD countries                                                                   High intervention,                Low intervention,
                                                                                                                   high spending                     low spending
                                                                                                                   High intervention,                Average
Market intervention by institutions
                                                                                                                   medium spending
for workers, consumers, and savers,
2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest), index1                                                                     2000 average                      2018 average
                                                                                      38%           41%
    150
                                                                               Greece      +3pp

    140
                                                                                                      Norway
                                                                                               Portugal
    130                                                                                              Finland
                                                                                                           Austria            France

    120
                                                                      Netherlands
                                                                                            Italy
    110                                                                            Germany
                                                                                                         Belgium
                                                                                                                           Sweden
                                                                                Spain
100                                                                                                                                                                      100

             South Korea
                                                                                                                 Denmark                                               -13
    90                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                         87
                                                   Japan                                              Average
                                                                   Canada
                                                                UK
    80


    70
                                                 Ireland
                                                               Australia
    60


    50
                                                                                 New Zealand
                                                United States
    40

      15%             20%               25%                30%               35%               40%               45%               50%               55%               60%

                                                                                     Public-sector spending on workers, consumers, and savers,
                                                                                                        2000 to 2018 (or latest), percent of GDP2




1 Composite index for workers, consumers, and savers weighted equally. Components include workers: employment protection (permanent contracts), employment
  protection (temporary contracts), and collective agreement coverage; consumers: product market regulations, retail price controls, social rental housing stock, intensity
  of rent control, inverse of voluntary out-of-pocket spending on healthcare, inverse of private spending on education; savers: net replacement rate from mandatory
  pensions, defined benefits assets under management.
2 Includes public-sector wages, total social spending (directed at individuals and households) for unemployment, active labor market programs, training, family and other

  social policies, healthcare, housing, pensions, public spending on education, and government gross fixed capital formation for infrastructure.
Note: Our social contract archetypes are not intended to judge which type of social contract is better or worse. Different countries prioritize certain values that shape their
  social contract.
Source: Hall and Soskice (2001); OECD; Eurostat; ILO; World Bank; national accounts data; national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of
        rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




20                                          McKinsey Global Institute


                            Outcomes for workers, consumers, and savers vary considerably by
                            socioeconomic group
                            The greater individualization of the social contract in each of the three arenas has led to
                            considerable varation among social and economic groups (Exhibit E10). Most socioeconomic
                            groups have benefited in some areas, such as expansion in employment opportunities and
                            the falling cost of discretionary goods and services. However, the extent to which they have
                            gained differs, and certain groups have experienced some of the negative shifts in outcomes
                            more starkly.

                            — High-skill, high-income individuals have fared well. Economic outcomes for the top two
                              quintiles of the population (by income and wealth levels) in our 22 countries have improved
                              since 2000, with those in the top quintile particularly benefiting. Considering occupational
                              groups, approximately 115 million high-skill, high-wage workers in Europe and the United
                              States have seen their employment share rise strongly, by almost four percentage points
                              between 2000 and 2018, and their compensation has also grown. Saving rates for high-
                              income groups rose as a share of disposable income between 2010 and 2015, and their
                              overall share of total wealth has also risen. 51

                            — Middle-skill, middle-income workers have been squeezed out of the labor market.
                              Roughly 120 million middle-skill, middle-wage jobs in Europe and the United States have
                              been “hollowed out” as jobs in this segment decline—although recent data suggest a
                              slight recovery for middle-wage workers in the United States. 52 Our findings confirm this
                              development: workers in the middle income quintile have experienced negative outcomes
                              in employment, with the employment share dropping by more than 6 percent between
                              2000 and 2018, especially in Belgium, France, and Greece.




95M
                            — Consumption and savings outcomes have been worse for many low-skill, low-income
                              individuals. Notwithstanding the attention paid to the middle class, some 95 million low-
                              skill, low-wage individuals in Europe and the United States have been especially affected,
                              even though their employment share has risen. The share of total income for the bottom
low-skill, low-income         two quintiles declined by 1.2 percentage points between 2000 and 2017, from 20.4 to
individuals have been         19.2. As consumers, lower-income groups have been especially hard hit, particularly by
especially affected by a      the housing market. The cost of a minimally acceptable house is 43 percent of income
declining income share,       for households in the poorest income quintiles compared with 7 percent of income for
higher housing costs, and     the richest households. 53 With rising costs of basics, the biggest deterioration has been
falling savings               in capacity to save, with median savings for the lowest wealth quintile as a share of
                              disposable income dropping by 14 percent on average in Germany, Spain, Sweden, and the
                              United Kingdom. The share of total wealth of the bottom 60 percent, already very low at
                              7.6 percent, has fallen to 7.3 percent.

                            — Young people have fared less well than the elderly. In general, young people between
                              15 and 30 years old have experienced deteriorating outcomes in all three arenas, while
                              the elderly over the age of 65 have, with few exceptions, broadly benefited (Exhibit E11).
                              The young, who make up about 180 million individuals in our sample countries, have
                              difficulty obtaining well-paid, high-quality jobs and have a harder time climbing
                              on the housing ladder, with much lower wealth than that age group two decades
                              ago. Compounding the problem is the rising cost of housing; the cost of a minimally
                              acceptable house is 23 percent of incomes for young people between 15 and 30 years
                              old, versus 14 percent for people over 65. By contrast, old-age relative poverty is falling
                              almost everywhere.




                            51
                                 See Annie Lowrey, “The hoarding of the American dream,” Atlantic, June 16, 2017.
                            52
                                 See, for example, John Komlos, “Hollowing out of the middle class: Growth of income and its distribution in the US, 1979–
                                 2013,” Challenge, 2018, Volume 61, Issue 4; Peggy Hollinger, “A hollowing middle class,” OECD Observer, 2012; Nelson D.
                                 Schwartz, “Recovery finally yields big gains for average worker’s pay,” New York Times, January 6, 2017.
                            53
                                 See Tackling the world’s affordable housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2014. Definitions of minimum
                                 socially acceptable housing vary from country to country but include factors such as distance to work, access to a
                                 working toilet, and minimum space requirements.



                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     21


Exhibit E10

Outcomes by income and wealth group: High-income groups have benefited, while
low- and middle-income groups face negative outcomes.

Average of primarily 8 countries: France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States 1

                                                                             Worse than average                               Better than average                No data
                                                                                                             Income/wealth quintile
                    Expectation           Outcome                                                    Average Lowest   2       3                           4      Highest

Workers             Access                Change in employment share for low-,
                                          middle-, and high-skill, -wage occupations
                                          in 16 European countries and United                                -        2.7          -         -6.6         -         3.9
                                          States, percentage points, 2000–18
                    Compensation Change in real median wage for low-,
                                 middle-, and high-wage occupations in                                    3.8         5.3          -          1.1         -         7.3
                                 United States, percent, 2000–18

                                          Change in share of income in
                                          17 countries,2 percentage points,                                  -        -0.6       -0.6        -0.2        0.1         1.2
                                          2000–17 (or latest)

Consumers Prices and                      Change in share of spending on
          affordability                   housing, healthcare, and education in
                                                                                                          5.7          9.1        7.1        5.5         4.0        2.7
                                          Germany, Spain, and United States,
                                          percentage points, 2000–17
                    Access                Cost of minimum acceptable housing
                                          in Japan, United Kingdom, and United
                                                                                                           13          43         22          15          11          7
                                          States, percent of disposable
                                          income, 2014
                    Quality of            Change in rate of housing
                    outcomes              overcrowding in France, Germany, Italy,
                                                                                                         -0.1         0.9         0.2        -0.3       -1.3        0.1
                                          Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,
                                          percentage points, 2005–17
                                          Change in share of people who rate
                                          health as good/very good in 10                                  3.4         4.0          -         3.4          -         2.8
                                          countries,3 percentage points, 2005–17

Savers              Participation         Median savings as share of disposable
                                          income in Germany, Spain, Sweden, and                            20         -14          9          20         29         40
                                          United Kingdom, percent, 2015

                                          Change in median savings as share of
                                          disposable income in Germany, Spain,
                                          Sweden, and United Kingdom,                                      1.6        -3.1        -1.7       0.5         2.1        3.5
                                          percentage points, 2010–15

                    Sufficient            Change of share of wealth in 16
                    wealth                countries,4 percentage points,                                     -        -0.1       -0.1        -0.1       -0.9         1.2
                                          2009–16

                    Returns on            Rate of return on wealth assets by
                    wealth                quintile in France and United States,                           2.8         0.0         0.6        3.2         4.4        5.8
                                          percent, 2014 and 2017


1    We focused on 8 countries and 11 indicators due to limited data covering both socioeconomic group and country. As a result, this chart focuses on a narrower set of
     outcomes to illustrate differences across socioeconomic groups. Data availability for each indicator and country varies.
2    Data missing for Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, and Sweden.
3    Countries include Australia, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States.
4    Mapping data on change in share of wealth in bottom 60 percent to 1st, 2nd, and 3rd quintiles, average of top 5 percent and 10 percent to 4th quintile; and top 1
     percent to 5th quintile.
Source: Eurostat; US Department of Labor; UNU-Wider; World Bank; national statistics agencies; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




22                                           McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit E11

Outcomes by age group: Younger generations are facing challenges.
Average of primarily 9 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States1
                                                                 Youth (15–29)               Prime-age adult (30–64)                    Elderly (65+)            Average

                                                                                                       Worse                                                        Better
                   Expectation           Outcome                                                       outcome                                                   outcome2

Workers            Access to             Change in employment rate, average
                   work                  of 22 countries, percentage points,                                                                               4.2
                                         2000–18
                                                                                                          -4.1                            3.0
                                                                                                                                                           3.8

                                         Unemployment rate, average of 22
                                         countries, percent, 20173                                                                                     5.1
                                                                                                               14.1                       5.8          4.7


                   Compen-               Median equivalized net income growth,
                   sation                average of France, Germany, Italy, and                                                                          39
                                         United Kingdom, percent, 2004–17                                                            24
                                                                                                                                       28              30

Consumers Prices and                     Share of housing, healthcare, and                                                                         31.8
          affordability                  education in spending, average of
                                         Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and                                                        38.2               34.0
                                         United Kingdom, percent, 20153                                                                              34.2

                                         Change in share of housing, healthcare,
                                         and education in spending, average of
                                         Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and United                                      5.5               2.7         2.3       0.8
                                         Kingdom, percentage points, 1999–2015

                   Access                Cost of minimum acceptable housing,
                                         cities in United Kingdom and United                                                                         13
                                         States, percent of income, 20144                                                          23      16        14

                                         Share of people with tertiary education,
                                         average of Canada, France, Germany,                                                                      39
                                         Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and United                                                        33
                                                                                                                                                  36
                                         States, percent, 20175

Savers             Participation Savings rate, average of Germany, Italy,                                                              21.0
                                 Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,                                                        4.6        21.0
                                 percent of disposable income, 2015                                                                                 22.4


                                         Change in savings rate as percent of
                                         disposable income, average of Germany,                                                  0.4              0.8
                                         Italy, Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,
                                         percentage points, 2010–15                                                                       0.5                             9.5

                   Sufficient            Change in average adult wealth,
                   wealth                France, percentage points, 1970–2010                                                                      -13
                                                                                                                                   -14                               16
                                                                                                   -29
1   Data limitations affected calculation of outcomes for workers, savers, and consumers by both age group and country. As a result, we focused on a narrower set of
    illustrative outcomes.
2   Position of points are calculated as: (indicator value – average value)/average value; signs are reversed if a higher number indicates a worse outcome, e.g., sign for
    unemployment is reversed.
3   Youth mapped to under 30; adult is averaged of 30–44 and 45–59; and elderly is 59 and over.
4   Average cost of minimum acceptable housing in all cities with data availability.
5   Youth not tracked because large proportion in/not eligible for tertiary education.
Source: Eurostat; OECD; US Department of Labor; national statistics agencies; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         23


85
                             — Women have seen improvements but still lag behind men. Women have made
                               significant strides in catching up with men in the labor market, with over two-thirds of job
                               growth from 2000 to 2018 attributable to women, and the number of working women


cents
                               rising from 175 million to 206 million. Yet parity remains elusive; the share of working
                               women increased from 44 to 46 percent between 2000 and 2018. The gender pay gap
                               has narrowed from 80 to 85 cents for every dollar a man earns. It ranges from a low of
The amount a woman earns       96 cents in Belgium to a high of 65 cents in South Korea.54 Unsurprisingly, as savers,
on average for every $1 a      women have a median level of net wealth that is just 62 percent of men’s, although the gap
man earns in the 22 sample     narrowed in the past two decades. 55
countries
                             — Minorities continue to face challenges. For minorities in some countries such as the
                               United States, families struggling the most tend to be black or Hispanic. The wealth of
                               the median white family was ten times higher than that of the median black family and
                               7.5 times higher than that of the median Hispanic family in 2016.56 Moreover, automation
                               trends may be widening the racial wealth and income gap; for example, African Americans
                               may have a higher rate of job displacement compared with other groups in 13 community
                               archetypes analyzed, adding up to almost 19 million people by 2030.57

                             — Rural areas in Europe and the United States fell behind. Even within countries,
                               outcomes for workers in certain geographic regions could be more challenging than
                               in others. Urban areas saw faster employment recovery following the global financial
                               crisis. 58 In the United States, previous MGI research has shown that more than two-thirds
                               of job growth since 2007 has been concentrated in 25 cities and particular counties; our
                               ongoing research in Europe highlights similar local and regional patterns. 59


                             Adapting the social contract for the 21st century
                             Much has improved for individuals as workers, consumers, and savers in the first two
                             decades of the 21st century—a period of massive upheaval and progress in technology,
                             globalization, changing market dynamics, and a financial crisis. More progress through
                             technological advances and innovation and more economic growth are expected. It is
                             important that these gains are sustained and opportunities fully captured and expanded. As
                             we have discussed in more detail in our other research, this can happen through continued
                             economic and productivity growth; business dynamism; investment in economies, technology,
                             and innovation; and continued focus on job growth and opportunity creation, and on
                             competitiveness of companies and economies in a rapidly shifting global economy.60




                             54
                                  Gender pay gap looks at median wages and does not adjust for different types of occupations, experience, responsibility,
                                  or performance of men and women. See “Gender wage gap statistics,” OECD, 2019.
                             55
                                  Average of eight European countries (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Netherlands, Spain, France, Greece, and Italy). See Eva
                                  Sierminska, Wealth and gender in Europe, European Commission, 2017.
                             56
                                  Ana Kent, Lowell Ricketts, and Ray Boshara, What wealth inequality in America looks like: Key facts and figures, Federal
                                  Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 14, 2019. An analysis of outcomes for individuals from different ethnicities in our 22
                                  sample countries is not possible because of a lack of comparable data.
                             57
                                  The future of work in black America, McKinsey & Company, October 2019.
                             58
                                  OECD Regional Outlook 2019: Leveraging megatrends for cities and rural areas, OECD, 2019.
                             59
                                  The future of work in America, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2019; The future of work in Europe, McKinsey Global
                                  Institute, forthcoming.
                             60
                                  See, for example, the following McKinsey Global Institute reports: AI, automation, and the future of work: Ten things to
                                  solve for, June 2018; Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization, February 2018;
                                  A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, January 2017; and Digital globalization: The new era of
                                  global flows, February 2016.



24                           McKinsey Global Institute


200M
                              At the same time, some outcomes have been challenging for many individuals. We highlight
                              ten key problems that will need addressing in order to achieve better and more inclusive
                              outcomes for individuals. We focus on those affecting large numbers of individuals and those
Approximate number of         likely to persist unless addressed, given current trends.61
workers in the 22 countries
affected by wage stagnation   1. Persistent income polarization and wage stagnation. The uneven distribution of
                                 economic gains and prolonged wage stagnation are taking place at a time of positive
                                 aggregate growth. Wage stagnation has affected roughly 200 million people in the
                                 22 countries in our sample.62 This could worsen given the impact of technology and
                                 automation.63 What can be done to enable a higher share of income going to labor?

                              2. Work fragility and transition supports in an evolving present and future of work.
                                 Employment-related risks are rising and employment protection is on the wane, partly
                                 because of the increase in alternative work arrangements and growing challenges posed
                                 by automation and digitization. This issue is critical in a world in which, for example,
                                 28 percent of workers are in independent work and that proportion is growing.64 With
                                 automation, between 40 million and 150 million workers in advanced economies may
                                 need to switch job categories.65 Therefore, how can flexible, dynamic labor markets be
                                 supported, while also reducing fragility for workers?

                              3. Challenge of affordable housing. Rising housing costs have grown considerably
                                 faster than inflation in many markets and are absorbing much of the income gains of
                                 low- and middle-income households; roughly 165 million people in the 22 countries are
                                 overburdened by housing costs.66 The housing challenge also has cascading effects on
                                 individuals as workers. What can be done to unlock supply and other constraints?

                              4. Rising expense of and growing demand for healthcare and education. Healthcare
                                 and education costs have risen above general consumer prices. This significantly affects
                                 more than 125 million individuals who spend more than ten percent of their budgets
                                 on healthcare and education, as well as nearly 245 million people who are primarily
                                 supported by public funding.67 The need for more healthcare and education is likely to
                                 rise as people live longer, and as the nature of work changes and reskilling and lifelong
                                 learning become more important. How can technology and the competitive dynamics
                                 that benefited discretionary goods and services be harnessed to make healthcare and
                                 education more affordable as well as adapt to changing needs?

                              5. The growing savings and retirement problem. In a century of longer life expectancy
                                 and aging, how can the capacity and incentives for individuals to save more, and
                                 more effectively, be expanded? Although aggregate wealth is growing, approximately
                                 440 million people reported that they did not save for old age.68




                              61
                                   We provide high-level estimates for the number of individuals affected to give a rough order of magnitude. The list is not
                                   exhaustive or in order of priority.
                              62
                                   Estimated as 37 percent of the working-age population (share of middle-wage, middle-income occupations based on 16
                                   European countries and the United States). Excludes Germany, New Zealand, and South Korea, where wage growth was
                                   positive. OECD Population statistics, 2019.
                              63
                                   See Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of disruption, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2018.
                              64
                                   Average of six countries (France, Germany, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States). See Independent work:
                                   choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, 2016.
                              65
                                   Sum of Germany, Japan, and United States and other advanced economies; Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions
                                   in a time of disruption, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2018.
                              66
                                   Estimated as the 15+ population spending more than 40 percent of disposable income on housing. OECD Affordable
                                   Housing database, 2019.
                              67
                                   Estimated as the population aged 15 to 24 years and over 60 in Australia and the United States, where healthcare and
                                   education spending as a share of household consumption is 10 and 12 percent, respectively, and the corresponding
                                   population of the other 20 countries in our sample where spending ranges from 3 to 7 percent. OECD Population
                                   statistics, 2019.
                              68
                                   Equivalent to 53 percent of the population aged 15 and up in our 22-country sample. Financial inclusion indicators, World
                                   Bank; OECD Population statistics, 2019.




                              The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                      25


     6. The multiple pressures on low-income individuals. Roughly 335 million low-income
        individuals in the 22 countries face difficulties as workers, consumers (especially with
        respect to basics such as housing), and savers, and their position has grown more
        precarious than it was in 2000.69 How can social safety nets and other supports be
        revamped for the current era and challenges? What market-based mechanisms can
        be established to assist them?

     7. A new era of challenging outcomes for the under-30 generation. Young people
        between 15 and 30 years old, who currently number 180 million, have less access than
        previous generations to well-paid, stable employment, affordable housing, and decent
        savings. What can be done to support younger generations in an era of more precarious
        work and rapidly changing labor-market skill dynamics?

     8. The persistent gender and race gaps. Although more than 205 million working women
        have made strides in the labor market, they continue to lag behind men in employment,
        wages, and savings , and overall wealth. Similarly, the racial wealth and income gap in
        some countries, such as the United States, is both persistent and growing.70 How can
        opportunities presented by the future of work be harnessed to narrow the gap?

     9. The growing challenges of place. Certain regions and local economies, mostly in
        Southern Europe and in declining industrial areas in the United States, where more than
        215 million people live, have not recovered fully from the global financial crisis, which
        continues to weigh on individual outcomes. Some have not kept pace with or benefited
        from the changes driven by technology, globalization, and shifting focus of market and
        economic activity, as well as investment, many of which could persist.71 What can be done
        to better integrate regional labor markets into the growing economy?

     10. The risk of unsustainable government funding. Tax collection and government revenue
         generation are not keeping pace with government spending, which has risen to support
         individuals coping with global trends. Healthcare and pension systems in particular are
         coming under stress because of aging populations. What can be done to ensure the
         sustainability of these public budgets?

     Some institutions—public, private, and social—and individuals are starting to adapt and
     take action. Public-sector actions include new labor laws in some countries to protect those
     in alternative working arrangements. The United Kingdom, for example, has conducted
     a comprehensive review of modern working practices.72 Several state- and national-level
     commissions are under way; the Aspen Institute’s Future of Work initiative aims to identify
     concrete ways to address challenges facing American workers and businesses.73 In housing,
     some cities are rethinking zoning and density laws to encourage supply, while others are
     proposing policies to limit rent increases.

     In the private sector, one sign of a broader reappraisal came from the Business Roundtable
     in August 2019. The organization, made up of CEOs of major US companies, announced
     its members are redefining the purpose of a corporation as caring and delivering value for
     employees, customers, suppliers, and communities, as they do with shareholders.74 A number
     of companies are moving to retrain their workforces, for example, while others are providing
     benefits to workers, including for child care and healthcare.75 Several technology firms
     have announced plans to build housing for their workers, given the shortage of affordable



     69
          Estimated as the population over 15 years in the bottom two quintiles of the income distribution. OECD Population
          statistics, 2019.
     70
          OECD Population statistics, 2019. United States Census, 2010. Racial data availability for most countries in our sample is
          limited.
     71
          The future of work in America, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2019; The future of work in Europe, McKinsey Global
          Institute, forthcoming.
     72
          Kevin Barrow, “Two years since the Taylor Review: What next?,” HR, October 1, 2018.
     73
          The Aspen Institute, Future of Work Initiative, 2019.
     74
          “Business Roundtable redefines the purpose of a corporation to promote ‘an economy that serves all Americans,’”
          Business Roundtable, August 19, 2019.
     75
          “Building the workforce of tomorrow, today,” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2018.

26   McKinsey Global Institute


accommodation near where they are located. Such initiatives tend to be selective and limited
to high-skill, high-wage jobs at large corporations, however.

The social sector and other institutions, including philanthropic foundations and faith-based
charities, are also playing a larger role in addressing some key challenges. And, as has
happened for generations, families are helping their younger members with education and
housing. In the United Kingdom, for example, parents collectively give £6.3 billion to support
their children onto the housing ladder, high enough to rank them the tenth-largest mortgage
lender in the country.76

Finally, individuals themselves are changing their behavior in light of these changes to the
social contract. Many workers are opting for independent work as their primary source of
income or to supplement their existing income.77 Automation requires new and different
workforce skills, and individuals today have many more opportunities to prepare themselves
and learn or improve skills than they used to. Courses on online platforms are increasingly
accessible, and lifelong learning is helping individuals to stay ahead.



While many actors are beginning to respond to these challenges to varying degrees through
a variety of mechanisms, most efforts seem early, localized, and relatively small in scale and
scope, compared with the extent of the challenges. Moreover, many have yet to fully take
into account the effect of factors including climate change likely to impact work and other
economic aspects of the social contract. Much of the impact of climate change is likely to
be regressive, affecting economically vulnerable individuals the most. Therefore, concerted
action is needed on two fronts: first, to make sure that the gains of the 21st century so far are
sustained and scaled, and the potential for even more opportunities and economic prosperity
is fully realized. Second, to make sure that the outcomes for individuals in the next 20 or
more years of the 21st century are better and more inclusive than in the first 20 and that they
increase broad and inclusive prosperity.




76
     “Bank of mum and dad ‘one of UK’s biggest mortgage lenders,’” BBC News, August 27, 2019.
77
     Independent work: Choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2016.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                   27


© Getty images



28               McKinsey Global Institute


1                             The evolving
                              social contract
                              More than a decade after the global financial crisis, economic growth is back—albeit relatively
                              weakly—and the labor market is seemingly strong: unemployment rates have fallen to historic
                              lows in many countries, and the employment rate is at a record high, above 70 percent in our
                              22 sample countries.




>70%
                              The public mood is far from buoyant, however. Polls suggest that many people are not feeling
                              optimistic about their personal economic situation now and are no less pessimistic about
                              the future.78 One concern is that members of this generation and the next may end up being
                              poorer than their parents.79 Surveys show waning public trust in government and other
Employment rate in the        societal institutions. In one global survey, 60 percent of respondents said they believed their
22 sample countries, a high   country was “on the wrong track.” Trust in government fell in more than half of the OECD
since 2000                    economies between 2006 and 2016. 80 Income inequality and wage stagnation are causes
                              of particular dissatisfaction. Almost half the people polled in 16 OECD economies said they
                              believe the average person in their country is worse off today than 20 years ago. 81

                              How to explain this apparent paradox between the glum mood and some genuinely positive
                              developments? The latter include not just higher employment rates in most countries, but also
                              continuously improving educational attainment, narrowing of the gender gap, and longer life
                              expectancy, to name a few. In this research, we seek to go beyond perceptions and averages
                              to examine how individuals are faring in three arenas that are core to the long-established
                              notion of a “social contract.” The three arenas are the different economic roles of individuals
                              as workers in the labor market, as consumers in the market for goods and services, and as
                              savers in the capital market.

                              In the three arenas, we find some evidence to suggest that an important societal shift is taking
                              place. The implicit relationship between individuals and institutions based on sharing the
                              responsibility for economic outcomes seems to be evolving. Individuals must assume a larger
                              burden of responsibility for their economic outcomes than they did even two decades ago.
                              This is creating myriad new opportunities for those able to seize them. Yet at the same time,
                              many are struggling to cope with the shift. These structural changes have been occurring for a
                              longer time, but we focus on the past 20 years for reasons of data availability.

                              As we describe in later chapters, the shifts toward an increasingly individual social contract
                              are partly due to global trends such as automation, globalization, and changing demographics,
                              and partly because institutions themselves have changed position, leaving individuals with
                              greater responsibility for their economic outcomes. The 2008 financial crisis exacerbated a
                              number of these trends, but the development started earlier and goes beyond the effect of
                              the crisis itself.

                              In this opening chapter, we describe how we conducted our research and discuss some major
                              global trends affecting individual economic outcomes, from technological innovation to
                              shifting demographics.


                              78
                                   For example, the annual United Nations World Happiness Survey shows that satisfaction in the ten countries at the core
                                   of our sample has declined by 4.2 percent since 2005.
                              79
                                   Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in advanced economies, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2016.
                              80
                                   What worries the world, Ipsos Public Affairs, 2018; McKinsey Citizen Development and Confidence Research, 2018;
                                   Gallup, 2016. See also Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.
                              81
                                   Global Attitudes Survey Q2 and Q3, Pew Research Center, Spring 2018.


                              The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   29


     Measuring the evolution of the social contract
     The starting point for our research was to identify commonly held expectations—that is, the
     economic outcomes that people say they care most about—in labor, consumption, and saving.
     To do this, we conducted a review of the burgeoning research on economic satisfaction and
     well-being. 82 At its core, the social contract is an implicit quid pro quo for individuals: they
     contribute a range of their talents, energy, time, skills, and income. They collaborate with
     public- and social-sector entities as well as private companies to achieve prosperity and
     share risks and responsibilities. In return, they expect some specific outcomes. While the
     social contract also refers to the values that define relationships among individuals, separate
     from specific institutional arrangements, in this research we focus on interactions between
     individuals and institutions.

     There can be many different implicit arrangements, framing varied social contracts, in
     different parts of the economy and society. However, in the 22 OECD economies we
     examined, today’s social contract is mostly managed through markets. 83 The public sector
     plays an orchestrating role through market regulation as well as a direct role as market
     participant, for example through providing public employment and public services, as well
     as through direct spending. The private sector is then the key operator in these markets.
     Alongside these actors is a galaxy of other institutions that also affect individual well-being
     and the social contract. They include philanthropic and nongovernmental organizations, as
     well as family and religious or social communities. The economic dependence of individuals on
     family and religious institutions has markedly decreased over the past decades: for example,
     single-parent households and divorce rates have increased. 84

     One dimension on which our study does not focus is the role of individuals as citizens.
     In exchange for contributing to society, citizens expect physical security, political
     representation, and strong governance. In addition, they seek a sense of community and
     relationships that drive personal life satisfaction. Another goal, of environmental sustainability
     in the face of climate risk, has also come to the fore. We also do not look at the role of
     individuals as parents and how they are shaping the social contract for their children.

     The study does cover concerns of individuals as workers, consumers, and savers. In the labor
     market, expected outcomes include access to and the ability to participate in work, stability
     of labor, as well as quality and benefits, and compensation—both the growth of income and
     its distribution. For consumers, the outcomes center on the price, quality, and affordability
     of both basic and discretionary goods and services. For savers, expected outcomes include
     participation and the ability to engage in saving, some stability and risk limitation for savings,
     and, especially, sufficient wealth to provide a decent living in old age (Exhibit 1).

     Our full sample of 22 OECD economies accounts for 57 percent of global GDP and a
     population of almost 1 billion. We focus on these countries in this research as a starting point
     for assessing the evolving social contract, since their residents’ experiences as workers,
     consumers, and savers are relatively homogeneous. Emerging economies, such as China
     and India, are in a different stage of development and have their own versions of the social
     contract, which are also in transition.



     82
          Sources we examined include the OECD’s Better Life Index; Joseph Stiglitz, Amartya K. Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi,
          Measurement of economic performance and social progress, 2009; the UN Human Development Index and Sustainable
          Development Goals; and Matthew Taylor, Good work: The Taylor review of modern working practices, UK Government,
          2017. Also see the Social Progress Imperative; Andrea Garnero, Alexander Hijzen, and Sébastien Martin, More unequal,
          but more mobile? Earnings inequality and mobility in OECD countries, OECD Social, Employment and Migration working
          paper number 177, February 2016; “How good is your job? Measuring and assessing job quality,” in OECD employment
          outlook 2014, OECD, 2014; Jacob S. Hacker, The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the Decline of the
          American Dream, second edition, New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2019; and Daniel J. Benjamin et al., “Beyond
          happiness and satisfaction: Toward well-being indices based on stated preference,” American Economic Review,
          September 2014, Volume 104, Number 9.
     83
          The 22 countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
          Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
          and the United States.
     84
          Jeanne Fagnani, The future of families to 2030, OECD, 2012.




30   McKinsey Global Institute


Our analytical work focuses on a description of the development of economic outcomes
and of the changes in the institutional architecture of the social contract. In looking at
outcomes for individuals, we consider the average picture but also focus on groups that have
experienced the largest changes (for example, middle-skill workers who face significant
declines in employment) as well as those with the lowest levels of income and wealth, for
example. We also analyze, where possible, differences related to age and gender.

Regarding the role of institutions, we constructed composite indexes that serve as proxies
for two core elements of the social contract: the institutional responsibility via market
intervention mechanisms, and public-sector spending aimed at mitigating individual risk. We
describe these in detail in chapter 5.

This research builds on and integrates previous MGI work that has examined issues of income
advancement, consumption sufficiency, and inequality in economic outcomes, among other
topics. 85 We also draw on work by others. 86 Our attempt to provide an integrated perspective
on the arenas of work, consumption, and saving was limited by a lack of comparable data.
In the labor market, country analysis of nonwage benefits varies widely, and long-term data
about independent work and entrepreneurship, for example, is lacking. Socioeconomic,
age, and gender breakdowns for most components were often restricted to a subset of the
22 countries because of data limitations. For savers, detailed modeling of retirement savings
gaps proved difficult because pension systems differ considerably.

In some cases, we reduced our 22 sample countries to a subset of ten for which we had
comparable data. At times, we were limited to country-level data for only two or three
countries. For a discussion of the data we used and how we overcame some gaps, see the
technical appendix.

The role of institutions and individuals in the social contract
The notion of a social contract that binds people and institutions in society is an old one, going
back at least to ancient Greece. History suggests that how people see the social contract, and
what they expect it to provide in their own lives, can vary substantially depending on country
and culture (see Box 1, “A (brief) history of the social contract and how it can change”). The
role that institutions, both government and the private sector, and individuals play in the social
contract is a fundamental part of the discussion.

Early modern philosophers envisioned a minimal role for the government: to protect
individuals from violence or protect their property rights in return for recognizing the
legitimacy of the state. To that end, governments must raise revenue—typically from taxes—in
order to fund law enforcement, the judiciary, and other institutions necessary for maintaining
law and order. 87 Over time, as the notion of markets developed, the role of government
broadened to include responsibility for facilitating competition and free markets, allowing
individuals to prosper from economic growth.




85
     See the McKinsey Global Institute reports Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in advanced economies, July
     2016; The power of parity: How advancing women’s equality can add $12 trillion to global growth, September 2015; A new
     look at the declining share of labor income in the United States, May 2019; and Inequality: A persisting challenge and its
     implications, June 2019.
86
     Other seminal works on the social contract include Nemat Shafik, “A new social contract,” Finance & Development,
     IMF, December 2018, Volume 55, Number 4; Lauren Damme, Rethinking the American social contract, New America
     Foundation, 2011; Maurizio Bussolo et al., Toward a new social contract: Taking on distributional tensions in Europe
     and Central Asia, World Bank, 2018; Including institutions: Boosting resilience in Europe, World Bank, 2019; National
     Economic and Social Rights Initiative, A new social contract, 2018; Under pressure: The squeezed middle class, OECD,
     2019; Dialogue series on new economic and social frontiers: Shaping the new economy in the fourth industrial revolution,
     World Economic Forum, 2019; Ian Davis, “The biggest social contract,” Economist, May 2005; Rethinking society
     for the 21st century, International Panel on Social Progress, 2018; Commission on Global Economic Transformation,
     Macroeconomic management meets the new economy and Technological disruption in the global economy, Institute for
     New Economic Thinking, 2019; Dennis J. Snower, Toward human-centered capitalism: Exploring a new social contract,
     Brookings Institution, November 2019; Paul Krugman, The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the
     1990s, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
87
     See Anne-Marie Slaughter, 3 responsibilities every government has towards its citizens, World Economic Forum,
     February 13, 2017.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     31


     Some of the extensive research on the social contract advocates the government’s
     responsibility for providing goods and services, primarily those that individuals cannot
     provide themselves or that are frequently underprovided by private sources, such as
     economic infrastructure and social welfare. 88 For some political philosophers, the rationale
     for government involvement in the social safety net is to protect its citizens from risks beyond
     their control such as unemployment, poverty, and insufficient savings in retirement, among
     others. Others think it is to ensure equality of outcome, for example. However, the generosity
     of the social safety net is the subject of much debate. 89 Proponents of fiscal prudence, such as
     the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, assert that the government should set a
     course between investing in the social safety net and maintaining a healthy balance sheet.90

     A third approach sees the government as an investor in its citizens, with a heavy emphasis
     on investing in education that extends from early childhood development to university to
     retraining and reskilling programs as the world of work rapidly changes. In this approach,
     the government’s role is to support individuals to better prepare for a rapidly changing
     environment, rather than necessarily protecting individuals from risks beyond their control.91
     In practice, governments protect and invest in their citizens and provide public goods and
     services. However, the extent to which the government takes on these responsibilities will
     vary depending on a society’s intrinsic values.

     The debate surrounding the role of the private sector in the social contract has been
     discussed by many economists, from Adam Smith to Milton Friedman. One school of thought
     argues that the relationship between the private sector and other actors in society should
     be purely economic and transactional: companies aim to maximize profit by selling goods
     and services to customers, provide wages to workers in return for labor, and should abide
     by regulations that govern their activities. Proponents of this view argue that by aiming
     to maximize profit, the private sector contributes to the well-being of citizens by creating
     economic growth.92

     A second school of thought contends that the private sector should take on a more holistic
     role in the social contract, contributing to the security and well-being of workers while also
     focusing on longer-term objectives rather than short-term profits. Historically, private-sector
     companies such as the Ford Motor Company contributed to the well-being of workers by
     paying higher-than-market wages, while others such as Rowntree offered pensions, medical
     treatment, and a profit-sharing scheme.93 This model is also common in countries such
     as France and Germany. In recent years, particularly after the global financial crisis, more
     private-sector leaders have begun to advocate for greater corporate social responsibility,
     particularly regarding sustainability and new technologies, and argue for “capitalism for
     the long term.” This view is a shift in how businesses should view their role in society in
     some countries. Rather than profit in the short term, businesses should serve the interests of
     stakeholders, employees, customers, and others in order to maximize their long-term value.94




     88
          See Peter Hall, “The changing role of the state in liberal market economies,” in The Oxford Handbook on the
          Transformation of the State, Stephan Leibfried et al., eds, Oxford, UK; Oxford University Press, 2015, and Jacob S.
          Hacker, The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the Decline of the American Dream, second edition, New
          York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2019.
     89
          Gøsta Esping-Andersen, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,1990.
     90
          The state of social safety nets, World Bank, 2018.
     91
          Anne-Marie Slaughter, 3 responsibilities every government has towards its citizens, World Economic Forum, February 13,
          2017.
     92
          See Peter A. Hall and David Soskice, “An introduction to varieties of capitalism,” in Varieties of Capitalism: The
          Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage, Peter A. Hall and David Soskice, eds., Oxford, UK: Oxford University
          Press, 2001; Rawi Abdelal and John G. Ruggie, “The principles of embedded liberalism: Social legitimacy and global
          capitalism,” in New Perspectives on Regulation, David Moss and John Cisternino, eds., Cambridge, MA: The Tobin
          Project, 2009.
     93
          See What can businesses learn from the Rowntrees?, Joseph Rowntree Foundation, March 15, 2016; Sarah Cwiek,
          “The middle class took off 100 years ago … thanks to Henry Ford?,” NPR, January 27, 2014; Axel Haunschild, “Lifestyles
          as social contracts between workers and organizations,” Schmalenbach Business Review, October 2011, Volume 63,
          Issue 4.
     94
          See Shanya Strom and Mark Schmitt, Protecting workers in a patchwork economy, The Century Foundation, 2016;
          Dominic Barton, “Capitalism for the long term,” Harvard Business Review, March 2011.




32   McKinsey Global Institute


                                             In certain schools of economic thought, it is understood that the individual’s role is to
                                             maximize self-interest, which includes recognizing the legitimacy of the government.
                                             Many advocates argue that individuals are primarily responsible for their own well-being
                                             in society, which includes working hard, building their wealth, and relying on social welfare
                                             only when necessary.95

                                             Another school of thought contends that individuals have responsibilities beyond maximizing
                                             their self-interest. In this framework, individuals who are more fortunate should help those



                                             95
                                                  See Nick Romeo and Ian Tewksbury, Rebirth of the body politic, Aeon, February 26, 2019; Tony Judt, Ill Fares the Land,
                                                  New York, NY: The Penguin Press, 2010.


Exhibit 1

Our framing of the social contract identifies commonly held expectations among workers,
consumers, and savers in a system of exchange with institutions, but excludes noneconomic
aspects.
                                                  Collaboration with                                                                 Our focus is on the economic
                                                  institutions to achieve                                                            aspects of the social contract
                                                  prosperity and share risks
                                                   Public       Private Social
Individuals in various roles,                                                              Commonly held expectations of what the social contract
and individual inputs1                                                                     will enable for individuals2

             Workers                                                                          Access and ability to participate in work
              Education, skills,                                                             Benefits, for example, paid holidays and flexibility of work
               knowledge, and                                                                 Quality such as safety, training, and career progression
               expertise                                                                      Form and stability of employment
              Time and energy                                                                Compensation, notably growth and distribution of wages

             Consumers                                                                     Examined for basic and discretionary goods and services 3
              Usage of disposable                                                          Prices and affordability
               income for                                                                   Access and availability
               consumption                                                                  Quality of outcomes

             Savers                                                                           Participation and ability to engage in saving
              Pension payments                                                               Sufficient wealth to provide a decent living in old age
              Savings and                                                                    Returns on wealth, including growth and distribution
               investment                                                                     Stability and risk of savings

             Citizens                                                                         Physical security and justice
              Adherence to laws                                                              Political voice and governance
              Civic engagement                                                               Social connections and relationships
              Contributions to                                                               Personal life satisfaction
               community / society                                                            Environmental sustainability
              Taxes                                                                          …

             …                                                                              …


1   Individual inputs refer to commitments made by individuals in their roles as workers, consumers, and savers in the social contract. For example, workers commit their
    time and energy to an employer in return for paid employment.
2   Based on literature review; extent of expectations varies across countries and individuals. Individual level of satisfaction is influenced by which expectations are most
    important to them and the extent to which those expectations are being met. Our selection of indicators within each dimension is not exhaustive but illustrative, and
    based on data available for comparison across 22 countries between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest).
3   Housing, healthcare, education, food, transportation, clothing, communications, recreation, and furnishings; other categories are restaurants and hotels, alcohol and
    tobacco, and miscellaneous goods and services.
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                            33


     who are less fortunate by paying higher taxes and supporting more redistributive policies.
     In some countries, the principle of “mutual obligation” is an important component of this
     approach. This principle says that while the more fortunate should support those who are less
     fortunate, the individuals receiving help should use it to become independent.96


     Major trends are driving economic outcomes
     Alongside the shifting balance between individuals and institutions, several major trends have
     shaped our economic environment and contributed to changing outcomes for individuals
     over the past two decades. The seven we highlight here are among the most significant in
     influencing these changing outcomes and contributing to the evolution of the social contract.
     However, we note that this list is not exhaustive. For example, it does not address the effects
     of a changing climate. Recent MGI research suggests that the nonlinear and nonstationary
     characteristics of physical climate risk could have potentially wide-ranging socioeconomic
     impacts which would affect the lives and work of millions of people globally.97 Much of the
     impact will relate directly to issues in this report, including impact on work and workability,
     impact on physical assets including housing, as well as supply chains which may affect the
     costs of many goods and services. Moreover, the impact will likely be regressive, affecting
     economically vulnerable individuals the most. In our discussion in the following chapters of
     how outcomes have changed for workers, consumers, and savers, we identify which of these
     trends specifically played a major role:

     Low productivity growth and structurally lower economic growth have become the norm,
     exacerbated by the cyclical global financial crisis and the subsequent slow recovery.98
     Between 2010 and 2014, productivity growth grew 0.5 percent on average in the United
     States and Western Europe, down from 2.4 percent between 2000 and 2004. This steep
     drop is partly due to the waning of a decade-long productivity boom brought about by the
     information and communications technology (ICT) revolution, as well as financial crisis
     aftereffects such as low private-sector investment and weak demand.99 Lower aggregate
     growth translates into lower wage growth and lower returns on several asset classes, largely
     due to measures to counter the sluggish recovery. This has led to stagnating wages, declining
     wealth growth, and an environment of low interest rates, which affects returns on savings.100

     Technology has fundamentally changed how we work, consume, and save. For workers,
     digital talent platforms such as LinkedIn enable finding new jobs more quickly and efficiently,
     while an estimated 15 percent of independent workers use online platforms such as
     TaskRabbit to match with potential customers. For consumers, technology has helped reduce
     the costs of many goods and services. Digital e-commerce platforms enable consumers to
     easily compare prices and switch providers for retail goods. Innovations in healthcare have
     contributed to significant increases in longevity through improved medical treatments. For
     savers, digital technologies have enabled many to access new financial services such as
     digital bank accounts and platforms for growing wealth at lower cost.101 At the same time,
     growing automation adoption and the introduction of artificial intelligence in the workplace
     are likely to be disruptive. Prior MGI work suggests that between 40 million and 150 million
     workers in advanced economies may have to change occupational categories, and almost
     everyone’s job will change to some degree.102 One of the critical challenges will be upgrading
     worker skills to deal with new workforce requirements, as we outline in chapter 2.



     96
           See Stuart Butler, Mutual obligation and the American social contract, The Heritage Foundation, January 2009.
     97
           See Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2020.
     98
           A new look at the declining labor share of income in the United States, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019.
     99
           Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization, McKinsey Global Institute,
           February 2018.
     100
           Some academics argue that slow total factor productivity growth and the decline in labor force participation in the United
           States are largely unrelated to the financial crisis and recession and were occurring regardless. See John Fernald et al.,
           The disappointing recovery of output after 2009, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper number 23543,
           June 2017.
     101
           For further details, see Independent work: Choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October
           2016, and “Tech for Good”: Smoothing disruption, improving well-being, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019.
     102
           See Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transition in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017, and
           Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2018.



34   McKinsey Global Institute


39%
                               Globalization has increased competition across markets, driven by global flows of goods
                               and services, the rise of emerging markets, and migration.103 In 2014, global flows of goods,
                               services, and finance accounted for 39 percent of global GDP, up from 24 percent in
                               1990.104 In 2015, migrants made up 3.4 percent of the world’s population yet contributed
share of global GDP from       9.4 percent of global GDP. Between 2000 and 2015, the number of migrants worldwide
cross-border flows of goods,   increased by 74 million.105 Some research has pointed to growing trade and the build-out of
services, and finance in       supply chains in Asia as factors in the relative decline of middle-income jobs in advanced
2014, up from 24% in 1990      economies.106 At the same time, global supply chains have reduced the cost of traded goods
                               and services significantly.107 For example, it is estimated that the United States received
                               $260 billion in value from increasing variety of goods from globalization between 1972 and
                               2001. The payoff from trade expansion is equivalent to a GDP per US household increase
                               from $7,014 to $18,131 between 1950 and 2016.108 Global flows of capital have also created
                               investment opportunities.

                               Demographic changes, including aging and the decline in birth rates in most advanced
                               economies, have repercussions for the labor force, the availability of housing, and the
                               sustainability of pension systems in advanced economies.109 The demographic dividend that
                               helped fuel rapid growth in global GDP between 1964 and 2014 has come to an end due to
                               declining fertility rates, and many countries, such as Germany, Japan, and Italy, have already
                               reached peak employment. Although increasing life expectancy in productive working life has
                               been a hallmark of progress during this past century, old-age dependency ratios will more
                               than double in advanced economies, increasing demand for healthcare, pensions, and other
                               social obligations.110

                               Changing gender roles have enabled women to join the workforce at unprecedented rates.
                               In the 1950s, many women were expected to remain in the domestic sphere, occupying the
                               dual role of wife and mother, while their husbands were the primary breadwinners. Between
                               1950 and 2000, labor force participation for prime working-age women in the United States
                               increased from 36 percent to 76 percent, while the rate for men remained constant at
                               88 percent.111 More recently, between 1990 and 2018, the ratio of female to male labor force
                               participation rates in OECD economies increased from 66 to 76 percent. This rapid rise has
                               been replicated in other countries, empowering women to pursue professional careers, often
                               while raising a family. Increased participation in the labor market empowered women as
                               consumers and savers, although they still lag behind men on several fronts. Looking ahead,
                               navigating transitions for the future of work could create opportunities in more productive,
                               better paid jobs, but failing to do so could worsen existing challenges.112

                               Structural changes. A range of structural factors has affected companies, sectors, and
                               economies in recent decades, with both direct and indirect impact on individuals. One of the
                               major shifts is from manufacturing to services, with technical services growing the fastest.
                               Intangible assets such as intellectual property products are also playing an increasingly
                               prominent role. The labor share of income has declined in many countries as a result of these
                               and other shifts, including the boom-bust commodity and real estate cycles. This has directly


                               103
                                     For further details, see Outperformers: High-growth emerging economies and the companies that propel them,
                                     McKinsey Global Institute, September 2018, and People on the move: Global migration’s impact and opportunity,
                                     McKinsey Global Institute, December 2016.
                               104
                                     Digital globalization: The new era of global flows, McKinsey Global Institute, March 2016.
                               105
                                     People on the move: Global migration’s impact and opportunity, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2016.
                               106
                                     David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China shock: Learning from labor-market adjustment to large
                                     changes in trade,” Annual Review of Economics, October 2016, Volume 8; Didem Tüzemen and Jonathan Willis, “The
                                     vanishing middle: Job polarization and workers’ response to the decline in middle-skill jobs,” Economic Review, Federal
                                     Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013.
                               107
                                     Globalization in transition: The future of trade and value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, 2019.
                               108
                                     Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Zhiyao Lucy Lu, The payoff to America from globalization: A fresh look with a focus on costs to
                                     workers, Peterson Institute for International Economics policy brief number 17-16, May 2017; Christian Broda and David
                                     Weinstein, “Are we underestimating the gains from globalization for the United States?,” Current Issues in Economics and
                                     Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 2005, Volume 11, Number 4.
                               109
                                     For further details, see Urban world: The global consumers to watch, McKinsey Global Institute, March 2016.
                               110
                                     Global growth: Can productivity save the day in an aging world?, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2015.
                               111
                                     For further details, see The power of parity: How advancing women’s equality can add $12 trillion to global growth,
                                     McKinsey Global Institute, September 2015.
                               112
                                     The future of women at work: Transitions in the age of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.




                               The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    35


     affected workers. Recent MGI research has shown that the labor share of income in the US
     private business sector declined by about 5.4 percentage points between the periods 1998 to
     2002 and 2012 to 2016. Without such a decline since 1998, average worker pay might be
     about $3,000 per year higher.113

     “Superstar” effects. Economic returns have become increasingly concentrated with the rise
     of superstar firms, sectors, and cities.114 Over the past 20 years, the gap has widened between
     the top 10 percent of the world’s largest firms by economic profit (superstar firms) and
     median firms. Superstar firms have 1.6 times more economic profit on average than superstar


     113
           A new look at the declining labor share of income in the United States, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019; Making it in
           America: Revitalizing US manufacturing, McKinsey Global Institute, November 2017.
     114
           Superstars: The dynamics of firms, sectors, and cities leading the global economy, McKinsey Global Institute,
           October 2018.




           Box 1
           A (brief) history of the social contract and how it can change
           The social contract is not a static construct, but one that has evolved throughout
           history. In ancient Greece, in about 400 BC, Plato’s Crito and The Republic explore
           the notion that a legal system exists as a result of a type of contract between the
           individual and the state. Augustine and Aquinas discussed what it means to be a
           good citizen and explored the sphere of individual autonomy. The issue resurged
           in 17th-century Europe, with the question of how best to organize society and the
           place of the individual in a monarchy. It was notably debated by Thomas Hobbes
           and John Locke in England in the mid-17th century and by Swiss-born philosopher
           Jean-Jacques Rousseau in France a century later, in his 1762 book, On the Social
           Contract. The discussion has continued into our era; in A Theory of Justice (1971),
           John Rawls explored the principle of justice as fairness, to articulate a central idea
           that cooperation should be fair to all citizens, regardless of their family, ethnic, or
           other heritage.

           Beyond these philosophical discussions, the social contract itself has evolved
           markedly over the centuries in the OECD economies we focus on in this report.
           Often, the most radical changes have taken place in periods of intense disruption,
           through war or revolution. At times, they have coincided with and been enabled by
           technological innovation.1

           In the first half of the 19th century, during the first Industrial Revolution in England,
           real wages stagnated for roughly 50 years, from 1790 to 1840. During this period, first
           noted by economist Friedrich Engels in 1845 and since known as “Engels’ pause,”
           profits as a share of national income rose and the labor share of income declined.2
           Wages began to rise after the 1850s, which economic historians have attributed to
           improving labor productivity driven by the use of fossil-fuel-derived energy in place
           of human and animal labor. 3 From a social contract perspective, substantial reforms
           were introduced at the end of the 19th century that strengthened the right of individual
           workers in relation to their employers, a development accompanied by a significant
           increase in public-sector intervention. These reforms included the right to unionize,


           1
               For a detailed discussion of technology’s impact through history, see chapter 1 of Jobs lost, jobs gained:
               Workforce transitions in a time of disruption, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2018.
           2
               Robert Allen, “Engels’ pause: Technical change, capital accumulation, and inequality in the British Industrial
               Revolution,” Explorations in Economic History, October 2009, Volume 46, Issue 4; for a discussion of historical
               wage trends, see Gregory Clark, “The condition of the working class in England, 1209–2004,” Journal of
               Political Economy, December 2005, Volume 113, Number 6.
           3
               E. A. Wrigley, “Energy and the English Industrial Revolution,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society:
               Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, March 2013, Volume 371.




36   McKinsey Global Institute


      limitations on child labor, the introduction of public high schools, urban planning to
      improve public health, elimination of debtors’ prison, and the extension of the right
      to vote to landless workers. 4 In other words, the relationship between individuals and
      institutions shifted significantly toward concerted efforts that ultimately reduced
      individual responsibility for economic outcomes. 5

      By the end of the century, the beginnings of the modern welfare state were laid, in
      Germany, where Chancellor Otto von Bismarck implemented an old-age insurance
      program in 1889. Germany also introduced sickness insurance and a workers’
      compensation program; this comprehensive social welfare system provided a model
      for Britain’s National Insurance Act and American New Deal legislation in the 1930s.6
      After the Second World War, many countries, especially in Europe, constructed or
      completed “cradle to grave” welfare states.7

      Since then, notable evolutions have taken place. In the 1980s, US President Ronald
      Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher sought to reduce the role
      of the state, including by eliminating regulatory restrictions on the private sector.
      The collapse of Soviet Communism in 1991 and the accession of Eastern and Central
      European nations to the European Union a decade later entailed the embrace of a
      more market-based social contract in those countries. 8

      Moreover, over the past 50 years, the social contracts of men and women have
      been converging: the economic outcomes of most women were previously heavily
      dependent on their family situation (first parents, then husbands). Adjustments in
      the labor market and welfare systems have led to a drastic reorientation of women’s
      social contract toward institutional counterparts.


      4
          Peter Mathias, The First Industrial Nation: The Economic History of Britain 1700–1914, New York, NY:
          Routledge, 2001.
      5
          Norman Gash, Sir Robert Peel: The Life of Sir Robert Peel after 1830, London, UK: Faber and Faber, 2011.
      6
          Wolfgang Mommsen, ed., The Emergence of the Welfare State in Britain and Germany, 1850–1950, London,
          UK: Routledge, 2018.
      7
          Nicholas Timmins, The Five Giants: A Biography of the Welfare State, London, UK: HarperCollins, 2001.
      8
          See Christopher Kirkland, “Placing the Thatcher reforms in the context of the capital/labour relationship,”
          in The Political Economy of Britain in Crisis: Trade Unions and the Banking Sector, London, UK: Palgrave
          Macmillan, 2017; Linda J. Cook, The Soviet Social Contract and Why It Failed: Welfare Policy and Workers’
          Politics from Brezhnev to Yeltsin, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.




firms did 20 years ago. We see the same concentration in superstar sectors: 70 percent of
gains in gross value added and gross operating surplus have accrued to establishments in
just a handful of sectors over the past 20 years. At the city level, superstar cities tend to be
economic heavyweights, accounting for 8 percent of the world’s population and 21 percent
of global GDP. They tend to be among the most globally integrated and most innovative
municipalities, and major financial hubs. Recent McKinsey Global Institute research suggests
that there may be a “superstar ecosystem” with superstar sectors generating increased
capital income for superstar firms, which contribute to increased concentration of wealth in
superstar cities that have a disproportionately high share of asset-management activity and
high-income-household investors.115 These effects contributed to rapidly increasing housing
prices in superstar cities, for example.



History holds many lessons about how the social contract has been perceived, how it can
evolve, and what the outcomes can be. In the following chapters, we focus on the three arenas
of the individual as worker, as consumer, and as saver to examine what has been changing in
the first two decades of the 21st century.


115
      Superstars: The dynamics of firms, sectors, and cities leading the global economy, McKinsey Global Institute,
      October 2018.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                 37


© Getty images


2   Individuals
    as workers
    Work is a foundational component of the social contract, not just in our era but throughout
    history. How individuals contribute their labor, and how they are compensated for it, are
    themes that infuse philosophical and social treatises across the political spectrum, from Karl
    Marx to Friedrich Hayek, to name two of the multiple and varied voices on the topic. For many
    individuals, the labor market is key to their satisfaction—or discontent—with life. And the labor
    market is an economy’s main instrument to share aggregate gains in the population.

    There are several essential aspects of an individual’s labor and the arrangements governing
    it as they relate to the social contract and individual expectations.116 A critical starting point
    is access to work: can people find gainful employment? Second are the expected benefits
    (other than compensation) and quality of work: is there paid leave, including for maternity or
    paternity, for example, and is the work safe? What are the career development opportunities?
    One relatively recent development concerns the stability of work: is the job permanent
    or temporary, and how strong is the protection against being fired? A growing number of
    people are undertaking independent or “gig” work, either for the flexibility it brings or out
    of necessity. This can include part-time work as a way to supplement incomes. Finally,
    how well is the work compensated through wages and other income? Is this compensation
    commensurate with the skill and effort required? And does it enable the lifestyle to which
    individuals aspire? Recent MGI research into inequality suggests a widespread expectation
    that compensation will grow over time and will be distributed throughout society with some
    degree of fairness.117

    In this chapter, we evaluate these expectations for workers in our sample of 22 OECD
    economies and the extent to which they have been met. Among the key findings are
    that employment is at record levels, and women, the elderly, and part-time workers have
    experienced the fastest growth. Much of this employment growth has affected high- and low-
    skill workers, however, with employment falling for middle-skill workers. Similar polarization
    has characterized wages, which have stagnated for middle-skill positions but grown for both
    high- and low-skill workers. Overall, income inequality has been increasing, and the rising
    levels of relative poverty indicate that workers at the lower end are falling behind, despite
    wage increases. These employment changes and wage developments are being driven in
    part by technological changes such as digital platforms, as well as by globalization. These
    turn out to be double-edged swords: technology, for example, has created new opportunities
    for job matching through digital platforms, even as it has accentuated the skills and wage
    polarization. At the same time, some institutional changes have also had an impact, for
    example by lowering employment protection and reducing collective agreements coverage.




    116
          Sources we examined include the OECD’s Better Life Index; Joseph Stiglitz, Amartya K. Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi,
          Measurement of economic performance and social progress, 2009; the UN Human Development Index and Sustainable
          Development Goals; and Matthew Taylor, Good work: The Taylor review of modern working practices, UK Government,
          2017.
    117
          See Poorer than their parents? Flat and falling incomes in advanced economies, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2016,
          and Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                 39


                           Employment is at its highest level since 2000, with improved work
                           benefits and quality
                           The past two decades have been turbulent ones on the labor market in many OECD
                           economies, as economic growth stalled following the 2008 global financial crisis before
                           recovering again, at times unevenly, in our 22 sample countries. In access to work and
                           quality of work, two important aspects of the social contract, outcomes for individuals on
                           the whole have improved. Employment has risen to its highest level since 2000, and workers
                           see improved quality in lower stress, upgraded benefits such as parental leave, and more
                           opportunities to develop their skills and careers through training.

                           Employment in 16 of our 22 sample countries is at a historical high, averaging 71 percent
                           in 2018, but with large country variations
                           For the working-age population, between 15 and 64 years old, employment in the 22 sample
                           countries grew by three percentage points—equivalent to some 45 million additional
                           workers—between 2000 and 2018.118 Employment rates are now at 71 percent of the working-
                           age population on average, a historical high since 2000 (Exhibit 2).119

                           Employment rates in 2018 were higher than in 2000 in 18 out of 22 sample countries.
                           The picture varies significantly among countries, however: Switzerland has the highest
                           employment rate at 80 percent, while Greece has the lowest at 55 percent. Six economies are
                           not at their highest levels of employment compared with 2000. Two of them, Denmark and
                           Norway, nonetheless had high levels of employment, at 75 percent in 2018. Three others—
                           Greece, Ireland, and Spain—have not yet fully recovered from the repercussions of the
                           financial crisis. In the United States, although unemployment fell from 4.0 percent in 2000 to
                           3.9 percent in 2018, the decline was driven by a rising share of discouraged workers.120 Many
                           of these workers may be discouraged about finding work or may have dropped out due to
                           illness and disability, among other reasons.121




31M
                           Of the 45 million additional workers employed between 2000 and 2018, 31 million are women
                           (Exhibit 3). In 2018, female workers represented 46 percent of the total employed working-
                           age population. Female employment rates increased by 6.3 percentage points between
                           2000 and 2018, with the highest growth occurring in Germany, Japan, the Netherlands,
of the 45M additional      and Spain. Growth in female employment in this period is seen almost everywhere except
workers employed between   Norway and the United States, where female working-age employment declined 1.3 and
2000 and 2018 are women    2.2 percentage points, respectively. In the United States, the growth of female employment
                           has been concentrated in certain roles that are in demand, primarily healthcare and
                           social assistance. Recent MGI research suggests that demand for these roles could grow
                           significantly by 2030.122

                           Between 2000 and 2018, employment rates for men stagnated on average in the
                           22 countries. In absolute terms, 14 million additional male workers were employed in this


                           118
                                 OECD Employment database.
                           119
                                 Employment rate of 71 percent reflects the employed people in the working-age population (15 to 64) as a share of the
                                 working-age population. However, demographic factors play a role in the labor market. In all 22 countries, the share of the
                                 working-age population declined as a share of the population aged 15 and older. While the share of elderly people (65 and
                                 older) who are employed rose by 4.2 percentage points between 2000 and 2018, the share of the employed working-age
                                 population over the 15-and-up population declined by 1.4 percentage points. This occurred in 12 countries, ranging from
                                 a decline of 0.03 percentage point in the United Kingdom to a decline of 5.8 percentage points in the United States. By
                                 contrast, the employment rate increased in ten countries including Germany (4.8 percentage points), New Zealand (3.2),
                                 and Spain (3.2).
                           120
                                 US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019. See Chad Bown and Caroline Freund, The problem of US labor force participation,
                                 Peterson Institute for International Economics, working paper number 19-1, January 2019.
                           121
                                 The rise in nonworking working-age persons may be due to early retirement, family care responsibilities, illness and
                                 disability, inability to move to areas with jobs, and being discouraged from finding jobs (for example, due to a lack of
                                 suitable jobs, lack of skills, or a criminal record). An alternative argument is that the quality of jobs (as measured by weekly
                                 wages) has declined and no longer meets the reservation wages of the working-age population, contributing to a rise in
                                 the nonworking working-age population in the United States. The reservation wage is the lowest wage at which a worker
                                 would accept a job. See Chad Bown and Caroline Freund, The problem of US labor force participation, Peterson Institute
                                 for International Economics, working paper number 19-1, January 2019; Edward Luce, “From financial crisis to inequality:
                                 How economists got it wrong,” Financial Times, October 21, 2019; and Daniel Alpert et al., The US private sector Job
                                 Quality Index, Cornell Law School, November 2019.
                           122
                                 Occupational Employment Statistics, US Bureau of Labor Statistics; The future of women at work: Transitions in the age
                                 of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.




40                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 2

Employment is at historically high levels and has recovered since the financial crisis in
most countries.

Employment rate, percent of working-age population (15–64 years)
Population-weighted average of
22 countries, percent1                                     Global
                                                           financial crisis
72
                                                                                                                             71                    Represents

                                                                                                                                                   45M
    71

70
                                                                                                                                       +3          additional
69                                                                                                                                     pp          employed
         68                                                                                                                                        workers
68

67

66
 2000            02           04             06          08               10           12           14          16          2018

                                                                                                                 Highest employment rate since 20002
Change, 2000–18, percentage points                                                                                             2000          2018
Germany                                                                                                                         10     66                 76
Japan                                                                                                           8                      69                 77
New Zealand                                                                                               7                            70                 77
Spain                                                                                               6                                  57                 63
Netherlands                                                                                     5                                      72                 77
South Korea                                                                                     5                                      62                 67
France                                                                                      5                                           61                66
Austria                                                                                     5                                          68                 73
Finland                                                                                     5                                          68                 72
Australia                                                                                   5                                          69                 74
Italy                                                                                       5                                          54                 59
Belgium                                                                                4                                                61                64
Sweden                                                                             3                                                   74                 78
Canada                                                                         3                                                        71                74
United Kingdom                                                                 3                                                       72                 75
Switzerland                                                           2                                                                78                 80
Portugal                                                          1                                                                    68                 70
Ireland                                                     1                                                                          68                 69
Denmark                                       -1                                                                                       76                 75
Greece                                  -2                                                                                             56                 55
Norway                        -3                                                                                                       78                 75
United States               -3                                                                                                         74                  71
Weighted average                                                               3                                                       68                  71
1 Calculated as employed people in working-age population (15–64) as a share of working-age population. Weighted by employment rates for each country by their share
  of total population aged 15 and over.
2 Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Norway, and Spain peaked in 2007–08; the United States peaked in 2000.

Note: Numbers may not sum due to rounding.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                         The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                 41


Exhibit 3

Employment growth in most countries has been largely driven by women and
prime-age adults.

Change in employment rate, 2000–18
Percentage points
                    Female                                             Male                        Youth                Prime-age adult                  Elderly
                    (15–64)                                          (15–64)                      (15–24)                   (25–64)                       (65+)

Spain                                                  15.8    -3.7                        -12.0                                      6.9                    0.6

Germany                                               13.9                     6.8                          0                              12.2                4.7

Japan                                                 12.9                3.0                                   3.3                      7.9                  2.2

Netherlands                                      10.1                    0.4                       -2.5                               7.0                      4.9

Italy                                            9.9            -0.6                         -10.1                                    6.4                     1.5

New Zealand                                      9.9                       4.2                               2.6                         8.4                              16.2

Belgium                                          9.3            -1.3                              -4.2                               5.3                     1.3

Austria                                          9.2                     0.2                         -1.5                            5.6                      2.2

France                                          8.2                      1.3                                      7.1               3.6                       1.7

Australia                                       8.0                       1.4                        -1.8                             6.2                           7.8

Ireland                                         7.3           -5.9                   -20.9                                           4.9                      3.8

South Korea                                     7.1                       2.7                      -3.3                             3.9                       1.9

Switzerland                                  6.3               -2.8                                -2.4                            2.3                        2.5

Portugal                                     6.3               -3.6                      -14.6                                     2.5            -6.7

Finland                                      6.2                          3.2                                2.8                     4.7                           7.3

Canada                                       5.3                         0.5                                0.1                     3.1                             7.6

United Kingdom                              4.8                          0.6                   -7.7                                  4.9                       5.3

Sweden                                      3.8                           2.7                        -1.7                            5.0                            7.1

Greece                                     3.6                -6.8                        -13.6                            -1.6                     -1.9

Denmark                                   1.0                  -2.6                           -8.7                                 1.5                         4.9

Norway                           -1.3                          -4.7                           -8.4                         -1.1                                     7.9

United States                   -2.2                           -4.6                           -9.2                        -2.2                                     6.4
Weighted
                                             6.3                -0.4                               -4.1                             3.8                        4.2
average1


                               31M                              14M                           -4M                         49M                        14M
                           additional female             additional male workers,          decline in young             additional prime-         additional elderly
                               workers                     but share declined                  workers                    age workers                 workers

1    Calculated by weighting the employment share of each country by its share of the population aged 15 and older for all 22 countries.
Source: OECD; World Bank; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




42                                           McKinsey Global Institute


                             period, although they represented a declining share of the total male working-age population.
                             In 2018, male workers represented 54 percent of the total employed working-age population
                             of 71 percent. Male employment increased in 12 out of 22 countries, most notably in Germany,
                             where it rose by 6.8 percentage points. Declines were steeper in ten countries including
                             Greece, Ireland, Norway, and the United States, which saw a decline of 4.6 percentage points
                             in male employment.

                             Considering workers’ ages also highlights significant differences. Employment increased
                             for both prime-age (25 to 64 years old) and elderly (65 and up) adults on average in the
                             22 countries. Prime-age adult workers increased by 3.8 percentage points on average,
                             equivalent to 49 million additional workers, although the numbers decreased in Greece,
                             Norway, and the United States. Similarly, elderly workers increased their share of
                             employment by 4.2 percentage points, from 10.5 to 14.8 percent, between 2000 and 2018,
                             representing 14 million additional workers (over and above the 45 million additional working-
                             age employees). The ratio declined only in Greece and Portugal. The increase in elderly
                             employment is partly driven by higher retirement ages in some countries. In addition, although
                             remaining in the workforce may be a choice for some older workers due to increased longevity
                             and better health, many do not have enough savings set aside for retirement.123




4.1 pp
                             Employment declined for young people between the ages of 15 and 24 years, falling by
                             4.1 percentage points between 2000 and 2018 on average, equivalent to four million fewer
                             workers. This was the case in 17 out of 22 countries. The declines in youth employment were
                             particularly large in Ireland (20.9 percentage points), Portugal (14.6), Greece (13.6), Spain
Size of decline in           (12.0), and Italy (10.1). Finland, France, Japan, and New Zealand bucked the trend—in France,
employment for young         the increase was more than seven percentage points. This aggregate decline is partially
people aged between 15 and   driven by rising enrollment rates in tertiary degree programs, which are associated with
24 in 2018 versus 2000       improved labor market outcomes and therefore not necessarily a cause for concern. However,
                             young people are more likely to be unemployed than workers aged 25 to 64 years, particularly
                             in the Southern European countries where unemployment rates range from 20 to 40 percent
                             for those aged 15 to 24.124

                             Workers have seen improvements in many aspects of work quality and benefits, but
                             more is needed for 21st-century job quality
                             Along with the overall increase in employment, many workers say they are seeing
                             improvements in a range of work benefits, including on-the-job training and leave, as well
                             as greater flexibility to work remotely. Nonwage work quality and benefits merit a larger and
                             deeper study, particularly regarding privately provided benefits in our 22 sample countries.125
                             Due to data limitations, we use a few indicators, such as statutory benefits, as samples to
                             illustrate trends.126

                             Work is seen as becoming less stressful. In 18 out of 19 countries surveyed by the OECD,
                             workers report they are facing less strain in their jobs. In 2005, about one in three workers,
                             34 percent, said they faced more demands than resources to meet them, and in 2015,



                             123
                                   David Haass, “Retirement trends of baby boomers,” Forbes, September 3, 2019; Bob Pisani, “Baby boomers face
                                   retirement crisis—little savings, high health costs and unrealistic expectations,” CNBC, April 9, 2019; Amelia Hill,
                                   “Work till you drop: When will you retire—and do you want to?,” Guardian, January 30, 2017.
                             124
                                   See Martha Ross, Decoding declines in youth employment, Brookings Institution, June 1, 2016; Virginia Hernanz and
                                   Juan F. Jimeno, “Youth unemployment in the EU,” CESifo Forum, June 2017, Volume 18, Issue 2, pp. 3–10; Jeremy Staff et
                                   al., “The Great Recession and recent employment trends among secondary students in the United States,” Longitudinal
                                   and Life Course Studies, 2014, Volume 5, Number 2; OECD Labor Force statistics.
                             125
                                   In the United States, privately provided benefits represented 33 percent of total compensation for the median civilian
                                   worker in 2019. Total benefits include paid leave, supplemental pay, insurance, health insurance, retirement and savings,
                                   and legally required benefits. Employer costs for employee compensation: Compensation percentiles, US Bureau of
                                   Labor Statistics, June 2019.
                             126
                                   One method of measuring “job quality” includes the US Private Sector Job Quality Index, which measures the number
                                   of jobs paying above the weekly average wage divided by the number of jobs paying below the weekly average wage.
                                   This has declined since 1990, with the concentration of high-quality jobs falling from 94.9 in 1990 to 79.0 in July 2019.
                                   The authors also found that the gap in weekly average wages between high-quality and low-quality jobs has widened
                                   since 2004. Alternatively, Rodrik and Sabel define “good jobs” as positions that offer stable, formal employment with
                                   sufficient legal protections, enable at least a middle-class existence, and offer opportunities for progression.




                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                      43


                                             that had fallen to 27 percent on average, roughly one in four.127 However, the share of workers
                                             experiencing physical health risk factors rose from 27 percent to 35 percent between
                                             2005 and 2015. Although workers in 12 countries reported facing fewer physical health risk
                                             factors at work, there were substantial increases in the United States (26 percentage points),
                                             Australia (ten), and New Zealand (five).

                                             More workers also report receiving increased on-the-job training and are more optimistic
                                             about their opportunities for job progression. Workers in 13 of the 19 countries surveyed by
                                             the OECD reported more training; on average, in 2015, 56 percent said they had received
                                             training in the previous 12 months, compared with 50 percent in 2005. The OECD also
                                             found heightened optimism about opportunities for job progression in 15 out of 19 countries
                                             (Exhibit 4).

                                             Some benefits, including parental leave, have also improved. Maternity leave rose from
                                             38 weeks in 2000 to 45 weeks in 2016, while paternity leave rose from three to 11 weeks over


Exhibit 4

Workers report more opportunities for career development in their jobs compared with the
early 2000s, and statutory paid leave for both mothers and fathers has increased since 2000.

Workers face less strain in their jobs,                     …while many believe they have more
but physical health risks have                              opportunities for career                                  …and statutory benefits for parents
increased…                                                  development…                                              have improved
Workers facing more demands than                            Workers who have received on-the-                         Length of paid maternity, parental,
resources to meet them                                      job training in the past 12 months                        and home care leave available to
Percent of workers surveyed1                                Percent1                                                  mothers
                                                                                                                      Weeks2
                                                                                                 +6 pp
                                                                                         56
                                                                    50
                                                                                                                                                   45       +7 weeks
                                        -7 pp                                                                                 38
          34
                               27




        2005                  2015                                2005                  2015                                2000                  2016

Workers facing physical health risk                         Workers who expect career                                 Length of paid paternity, parental,
factors                                                     advancement                                               and home care leave available to
Percent of workers surveyed1                                Percent1                                                  fathers
                                                                                                                      Weeks2

                               35      +8 pp
          27                                                                                     +4 pp
                                                                                         23
                                                                     19
                                                                                                                                                    11      +7 weeks
                                                                                                                               3

        2005                  2015                                2005                  2015                                2000                  2016

1    N=19. Sample omits Canada, South Korea, and Switzerland. Weighted average for all countries, weighted by size of population aged 15 and older in all countries as a
     share of the total. Workers facing more demands than resources to meet them is “job strain,” composite measure of physical health risk, on-the-job training, and career
     advancement, plus a number of other metrics.
2    N=22. Number of weeks is simple average number of weeks for all countries in sample.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             127
                                                   OECD Job Quality database, 2019.




44                                           McKinsey Global Institute


                          the same period, on average for the 22 countries in our sample.128 By 2016, workers in 21 of the
                          countries had access to paid holiday days. The exception was the United States, which has
                          no federal statutory minimum paid vacation or paid public holidays; in practice, most private
                          employers offer paid vacation to employees.129

                          Despite these improvements, it is important to note that we do not have insight into how
                          these benefits vary for full-time and part-time workers. Many part-time workers, and those
                          in alternative arrangements, receive fewer benefits than full-time workers, particularly in
                          job security, career development, and training, in addition to lower hourly wages. However,
                          part-time workers typically have more flexibility in their working hours than full-time workers.
                          As alternative work arrangements continue to grow, more will need to be done to measure
                          and address the quality of jobs in these forms of employment.130


                          Independent work and new types of occupations are on the rise, enabled
                          by digital innovation
                          Technology has opened up new opportunities for individuals to work independently, with
                          digital platforms playing an especially significant role. Prior McKinsey Global Institute
                          research estimates that between 20 and 30 percent of the working-age population, or
                          more than 160 million people in the United States and 15 European Union countries, now
                          engage in independent work. More than half of those working independently do so to earn
                          supplemental income.




15%
                          Digital platforms are adding momentum to this development, thanks to the ubiquity of mobile
                          devices, the enormous pools of workers and customers they can reach, and the ability to
                          harness rich real-time information to make more efficient matches. About 15 percent of
                          independent workers currently use online marketplaces, which are growing rapidly. Workers
share of independent      choosing to work independently report higher levels of satisfaction than not only those who
workers currently using   need to work independently, but also those who choose more traditional jobs. Contrary to
online marketplaces       stereotypes, these independent workers span all demographic groups.131

                          In New York City, for example, about 13,500 yellow taxis were licensed to operate in the city
                          for decades.132 The rise of ride-hailing apps has seen the number of approved app-based
                          transportation vehicles surge from about 12,000 in January 2015 to 80,000 in 2019—
                          more than five times the number of licensed yellow cabs.133 This rapid growth has enabled
                          many ride-share workers to supplement their primary income. Yellow taxi drivers now face
                          increased competition for rides and lower compensation, and many of these drivers have
                          switched to ride-hailing apps.

                          Technological innovation more broadly has also created new types of work that did not
                          previously exist, from drivers on ride-hailing apps and big data translators to professional
                          video gamers and social media influencers. At the same time, growing automation adoption
                          has proved disruptive for many workers, especially in highly susceptible sectors such as
                          manufacturing; academic studies such as the work of Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo
                          suggest that every robot per thousand workers in the manufacturing sector makes as many as
                          six jobs obsolete.134



                          128
                                The United States has no federal paid maternity leave policy, which our analysis captures. Some states, such as
                                Massachusetts, require employers to provide unpaid maternity leave. Our analysis does not capture these state-level
                                differences.
                          129
                                According to a Society for Human Resource Management survey, 97 percent of US organizations offer paid vacation or a
                                paid time off plan. 2016 Employee Benefits: Looking back at 20 years of employee benefits offerings in the US, Society
                                for Human Resource Management, June 2016.
                          130
                                See In it together: Why less inequality benefits all, OECD, 2015; Women at work: Trends 2016, International Labor
                                Organization, 2016; Anne Saint-Martin and Danielle Venn, “Does part-time work pay?,” OECD Observer, 2010.
                          131
                                Independent work: Choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2016.
                          132
                                Aarian Marshall, “New York City flexes again, extending cap on Uber and Lyft,” Wired, June 15, 2019.
                          133
                                Ginia Bellafante, “Uber makes its pain New Yorkers’ problem,” New York Times, July 26, 2015.
                          134
                                Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo, Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets, NBER working paper number
                                23285, March 2017.




                          The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                  45


                               Globalization, especially the build-out of value chains and labor-cost arbitrage that sometimes
                               accompany it, has also taken a toll on some industries, occupations, and workers through
                               outsourcing and offshoring. A lively debate is under way over the size and extent of that
                               impact, and whether the impact of changing trade is larger than the effects from automation
                               and other technological innovation.135 A third disruptive trend for the labor market has been
                               the environment of low economic and productivity growth following the financial crisis.
                               For example, occupational shifts in Spain have led many skilled construction workers to
                               accept lower-income jobs.136

                               As discussed below, while these trends have created myriad new opportunities in the labor
                               market, they have also contributed to income stagnation and increased precariousness for
                               many, and especially affected the demand for middle-skill workers.


                               Alternative work arrangements including part-time work have
                               increased amid heightened polarization of the labor market and
                               stagnant average wages
                               While employment overall has risen, the growth has been largely driven by alternative
                               arrangements, such as part-time rather than full-time work (Exhibit 5). At the same time,
                               full-time work declined in ten out of 21 sample countries, and by 1.4 percentage points on
                               average.137 The decline was steepest in the United States (Exhibit 6). In some countries
                               and sectors, work that used to be full-time, permanent employment has changed in
                               nature, with alternative work arrangements increasingly becoming the norm (see Box 2,
                               “Alternative work arrangements are gaining in prominence, from ‘zero-hour contracts’ to
                               ‘workplace fissuring’”).138

                               The rise in part-time employment was largely voluntary and translated into 23 million
                               additional workers in the 16 out of 21 countries where it occurred, most notably in Austria,
                               Germany, Japan, and the Netherlands.139 The increase is typically attributed to the rising
                               labor force participation of women who trade off increased flexibility for fewer working hours.
                               This has contributed to the rise of dual-income families in advanced economies.140

                               Increased part-time work may be a conscious choice by some workers. However, according
                               to the International Labor Organization, it has knock-on effects for the career prospects of
                               many women. They include driving “occupational downgrading,” or replacing high-skill, full-
                               time work with lower-skill occupations that offer fewer hours and more flexibility yet fewer
                               opportunities for career advancement and associated financial perks.141




2.1 pp
Decline in male full-time
                               Involuntary part-time work also increased in 16 out of 21 countries by 0.9 percentage point
                               between 2000 and 2018, driven by Italy and Spain, where this form of employment rose by
                               5.3 and 4.3 percentage points, respectively. According to the OECD, involuntary part-time
                               employees want to work full time yet cannot find suitable jobs. The exceptions to this trend
                               were Belgium, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Sweden.
employment between
2000 and 2018. Female
                               The fall in male full-time employment drove the decline in full-time employment in 21 countries
full-time employment rose
                               (excluding South Korea, for which there was no data). Between 2000 and 2018, male full-
0.7 point in the same period

                               135
                                     David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China shock: Learning from labor-market adjustment to large
                                     changes in trade,” Annual Review of Economics, October 2016, Volume 8.
                               136
                                     Pana Alves and Alberto Urtasun, “Recent housing market developments in Spain,” Economic Bulletin, Banco de España,
                                     April 2019.
                               137
                                     Exceptions are Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the
                                     United Kingdom. Data for South Korea not available.
                               138
                                     Alternative work arrangements are work arrangements that differ from full-time, permanent employment, such as part-
                                     time work, temporary work, and self-employment. We focused on part-time work due to data limitations for other forms of
                                     alternative work arrangements (such as missing data and noncomparable populations of workers).
                               139
                                     Voluntary part-time work is a technical term used by the OECD and refers to paid part-time work rather than to
                                     volunteering, which is typically unpaid.
                               140
                                     Helen Barrett, “Employers baffled by dual-career couples with joint ambitions,” Financial Times, June 15, 2018.
                               141
                                     Sabine Laudage, “Part-time work and family building in OECD countries,” ifo DICE Report, April 2015, Volume 13, Issue 1,
                                     pp. 46–49; Women at work: Trends 2016, International Labor Organization, 2016.




46                             McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 5

Employment growth has been driven by workers in both voluntary and involuntary
part-time positions.
Employment rate by type of employment
Percent of population aged 15–64 years, 21 countries1                                                                                        Change since 2000
72                                                                                                                     +2.7 pp

                                                                                                                                    Involuntary
                                                                                                                                                       0.9 pp
                                                                                                                                    part-time


66


                                                                                                                                    Voluntary
                                                                                                                                                       3.2 pp
                                                                                                                                    part-time
60




54




                                                                                                                                    Full-time         -1.4 pp
48




42
 2000                                05                               10                              15               2018

1   Data missing for South Korea. Incidence of part-time work data are missing for Japan in 2000 and 2001 and for Ireland and Portugal in 2018. The latest available data
    has been used instead (e.g., 2002 for Japan and 2017 for Ireland and Portugal). Data for Ireland and the United Kingdom are missing for 2005 and 2008, so we have
    taken the average of the surrounding years (e.g., 2004 and 2006 for Ireland, and 2007 and 2009 for the United Kingdom). Data on full-time and part-time work missing
    for Australia in 2018; figures for 2017 used instead. Change in employment rate by type of employment calculated by taking absolute number of workers in each type of
    employment divided by total population aged 15 to 64 in the 21 countries, rather than weighting by the population aged 15 and older.
Source: OECD; Eurostat Labor Force Survey; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            time employment declined 2.1 percentage points, while female full-time employment rose
                                            0.7 percentage point. However, male full-time employment represented 47.1 percent of
                                            the employed working-age population in 2018, higher than female full-time employment
                                            at 31.0 percent. Voluntary part-time employment grew for both men and women, rising
                                            1.6 and 1.7 percentage points, respectively. In 2018, female voluntary part-time paid workers
                                            represented 13.0 percent of the employed working-age population in the 21 countries,
                                            compared with 5.2 percent for men (Exhibit 6).

                                            Female involuntary part-time employment rose 0.6 percentage point, representing
                                            2.5 percent of the employed working-age population in the 21 countries in 2018. Men also
                                            experienced an increase in involuntary part-time work, which rose 0.3 percentage point,
                                            representing 1.2 percent of the employed working-age population. Of the 21 countries, only
                                            Australia, Greece, and Spain followed the aggregate trend across all forms of employment.
                                            However, most countries experienced rising female employment across all forms of
                                            employment, while male part-time employment rose and male full-time employment declined.

                                            The share of workers on permanent contracts declined marginally by 0.1 percentage point
                                            between 2000 and 2018 on average in our 21 countries. However, this masks substantial



                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   47


Exhibit 6

Full-time employment declined in many countries, while all other forms of employment
increased, particularly voluntary-part time employment.

Change in employment rate, 1 2000–18
Percentage points
                                              Full-time                     Voluntary part-time                      Involuntary part-time

New Zealand                                                           7.8    -0.8                                                  0.1

Sweden                                                          3.7                    0.6                             -1.0

France                                                       3.2             -0.4                                                          1.9

Germany                                                    2.5                                                7.3                   0.5

Canada                                                     2.5                         0.6                                  -0.2

Japan                                                     2.3                                           6.1                 -0.4

Finland                                                   1.8                                2.1                                    0.7

United Kingdom                                          1.8                           0.2                                           0.7

Portugal                                               1.4                  -1.2                                                         1.2

Spain                                                  1.3                             0.4                                                            4.3

Belgium                                                0.7                                            5.0            -1.7

Australia                                       -0.1                                          2.4                                               2.4

Ireland                                       -0.6                            -0.4                                                        1.6

Norway                                        -1.4                          -1.3                                            -0.3

Italy                                         -1.6                                      0.9                                                                 5.3

Denmark                                  -2.2                                             1.2                                      0.1

Netherlands                            -3.7                                                                   7.4                         1.4

Greece                                 -4.1                                           0.2                                                       2.3

Austria                              -4.2                                                                      8.1                   0.9

Switzerland                          -4.2                                                             5.3                           0.7

United States                   -6.8                                                            3.2                                0.2

Weighted average2                             -1.4                                              3.2                                  0.9



                                       12M                                           23M                                           6M
                           additional full-time workers,                       additional voluntary                         additional involuntary
                               but share declined2                             part-time workers2                            part-time workers2


1 N=21. Excludes South Korea. Four million additional workers were employed in South Korea between 2000 and 2018.
2 Weighted average calculated by summing employed population divided by working-age population.
Source: OECD; World Bank; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




48                                        McKinsey Global Institute


     differences between countries. Temporary employment increased in 12 countries,
     most substantially in the Netherlands (7.8 percentage points) and Italy (6.9). In eight of these
     12 countries, the share of male workers increased as a proportion of temporary workers,
     most substantially in Belgium and Norway. The share of female temporary workers increased,
     notably in Greece and Spain, by 6.9 and 8.7 percentage points, respectively. Permanent
     employment increased in nine countries, particularly in Spain (5.4 percentage points) and
     South Korea (4.6 percentage points).

     The labor market is increasingly volatile. The employment rate for the working-age population
     in the 22 countries varied more between 2004 and 2018 than it did between 1990 and
     2004. This was largely due to the 2008 financial crisis, which resulted in a sharp decline in
     employment rates, from 69.3 percent in 2007 to 67.0 percent in 2010. However, the post-
     crisis recovery has seen a substantial increase in employment rates, from 67.0 percent
     in 2010 to 70.9 percent in 2018. The increased volatility in 2004–18 compared with
     1990–2004 was particularly notable for Greece. By contrast, the variability in employment
     rates declined in Sweden and Finland.

     Workers face increased labor market risks.142 According to the OECD’s composite measure
     assessing the risk of job loss, the duration of unemployment, and the coverage provided
     by the welfare safety net, workers lost up to 4.5 percent of their previous earnings in
     2016 compared with 3.4 percent in 2007 (Exhibit 7). These increased risks are particularly
     notable in Greece and Spain, where workers could lose up to 21.7 percent and 15.8 percent,
     respectively, of their previous earnings in 2016 compared with 6.6 percent and 4.2 percent
     in 2007.

     In Spain, for example, 1.7 million jobs were lost in the construction sector, accounting for
     nearly half of all jobs lost between 2007 and 2013. Due to the nature of the required skills,
     many construction workers had difficulty finding equivalent jobs in other sectors, which put
     them at increased risk of long-term unemployment and even of dropping out of the labor
     market entirely.143 By contrast, workers in Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom faced
     lower levels of risk in the labor market. In these three countries, this was due to one or more
     of the following: lower risk of becoming unemployed, less time spent unemployed, and more
     generous unemployment benefits.




The labor market is
increasingly volatile.
                                                                  The employment rate for the
                                                                  working-age population in
                                                                  the 22 countries varied more
                                                                  between 2004 and 2018 than it
                                                                  did between 1990 and 2004.

     142
           An alternative metric for labor market risk is income or wage volatility, which can be measured as the share of workers
           experiencing month-on-month variations in their income or year-over-year variations in income. Higher volatility related
           to income increases workers’ uncertainty—and therefore risk—about whether their monthly or yearly income will meet
           their needs. However, due to data limitations, we could not assess income volatility in our sample countries.
     143
           Frédérique Cerisier and Alice Rustique, Spain: Radical transformation of the labour market, BNP Paribas EcoFlash, July
           2017.




     The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     49


Exhibit 7

Periods of unemployment cost workers a larger share of their previous earnings in 2016
than in 2007.

Combined risk of becoming unemployed, duration of unemployment, and level of coverage provided by
unemployment protection
Percent of previous earnings lost, percentage point change, 2007–161
                                                                                                                                        2007            2016

Greece                                                                                                                      15.0         6.6             21.7

Spain                                                                                            11.6                                    4.2             15.8

Italy                                                                        3.7                                                         4.9             8.6

Denmark                                                               2.6                                                                 1.9             4.5

Portugal                                                        1.5                                                                      6.6              8.1

Norway                                                     1.3                                                                            1.6            2.8

New Zealand                                                1.2                                                                           3.3              4.5

Switzerland                                              0.9                                                                              1.5             2.4

Austria                                                  0.8                                                                              1.5             2.3

Australia                                                0.8                                                                             2.3              3.1

Sweden                                               0.7                                                                                 3.7              4.4

Canada                                              0.6                                                                                  3.2             3.8

Ireland                                             0.6                                                                                   2.1            2.6

Netherlands                                         0.6                                                                                  2.0              2.5

United States                                       0.5                                                                                  3.7              4.2

France                                              0.4                                                                                  2.7              3.1

South Korea                                        0.2                                                                                   2.7             2.9

Finland                                -0.0                                                                                              2.3              2.2

Belgium                             -0.5                                                                                                 2.9              2.4

United Kingdom                     -0.5                                                                                                  3.8              3.3

Japan                             -0.7                                                                                                   3.3              2.7

Germany                         -0.9                                                                                                     2.4              1.4

Weighted average2                                         1.1                                                                            3.4              4.5



1 OECD’s measure of labor market insecurity calculates expected earnings loss associated with unemployment, which depends on risk of becoming unemployed,
  expected duration of unemployment, and degree of mitigation against these losses provided by government transfers to unemployed population (effective insurance).
2 N=22. Weighted as a share of total population aged 15 and over in OECD countries.

Note: Numbers may not sum due to rounding.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




50                                         McKinsey Global Institute


    Box 2
    Alternative work arrangements are gaining in prominence, from
    “zero-hour contracts” to “workplace fissuring”

    Alternative work arrangements have gained in prominence over the past two
    decades, typically in the form of self-employment, temporary work, and part-time
    work. According to Eurofound, nearly one-third of European employees worked
    under alternative employment contracts in 2015.1 The hourly pay for workers in these
    jobs may be lower than for full-time or permanent workers, and they are likely to
    lose out on additional benefits such as training, career development opportunities,
    and financial incentives such as bonuses, profit sharing, and overtime pay, among
    others. In the United States, workers in alternative arrangements may also lose out on
    healthcare benefits.2

    Temporary work has increased substantially in Germany, for example. In 2016,
    approximately 5 percent of all employees worked as temporary agency workers,
    representing one million employees. 3 Most of these relationships are short-lived,
    according to official statistics: 31 percent lasted only a month, while 54 percent
    lasted less than three months. Only 12 percent lasted longer than 18 months. 4 In
    2015, these temporary workers received wages 43 percent lower on average than
    the wages of core employees. Many of these workers are concentrated in low-pay
    sectors and, compared with permanent workers, face higher risk of losing their jobs.
    As a result, many temporary agency workers are at risk of relative poverty, even if
    they are employed. However, the German government has passed legislation aimed
    at ending abuse of these types of employment contracts, including restricting the
    length to 18 months and requiring temporary workers to receive the same pay as core
    employees after nine months. 5 Other reforms include implementing a national minimum
    wage and requiring companies to inform temporary workers of vacant positions.6

    In the United Kingdom, “zero-hour” contracts—a form of employment under which
    workers are not guaranteed work yet must be available on demand for employers—
    have become increasingly controversial.7 According to the Labor Force Survey,
    approximately 2.4 percent of the UK population was on these contracts in 2018,
    down from 2.9 percent in 2016. A survey of businesses indicated that the total could
    be as high as 6 percent, however. 8 The gap between the two surveys is largely due to
    methodological differences such as counting individuals whose primary jobs are zero-
    hour contracts, incorporating individuals with multiple contracts, or measurement
    errors. Zero-hour contract workers tend to earn 6.6 percent less per hour than
    employees on non-zero-hour contracts with similar characteristics and in similar roles,
    according to the Resolution Foundation.9




    1
        Working conditions: Does employment status matter for job quality?, Eurofound, 2018.
    2
        See Women at work: Trends 2016, International Labor Organization, 2016; 2016 employee benefits: Looking
        back at 20 years of employee benefits offerings in the US, Society for Human Resource Management, June
        2016.
    3
        Vinny Kuntz, “Germany’s two-tier labor market,” Handelsblatt Today, December 9, 2016.
    4
        Nathan Hudson-Sharp and Johnny Runge, International trends in insecure work: A report for the Trades Union
        Congress, National Institute of Economic and Social Research, May 2017.
    5
        See Walter Hanesch, Reform of temporary agency work and service contracts in Germany, European Social
        Policy Network Flash Report number 2017/05, European Commission, February 2017.
    6
        Nathan Hudson-Sharp and Johnny Runge, International trends in insecure work: A report for the Trades Union
        Congress, National Institute of Economic and Social Research, May 2017.
    7
        See Douglas Pyper and Feargal McGuiness, Zero-hour contracts, House of Commons Library, briefing paper
        number 06553, August 17, 2018.
    8
        Office of National Statistics, Business Survey, 2017.
    9
        Zero-hour contract workers face a “precarious pay penalty” of £1,000 a year, Resolution Foundation,
        December 30, 2016.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                              51


         In the United States, a particular form of alternative work arrangement known as
         “workplace fissuring” has become increasingly prominent over the past two decades.
         It is defined as an arrangement in which workers are not employed by the company
         that benefits from their labor.10 The phenomenon began with companies outsourcing
         noncore activities such as accounting and payroll, and has grown to include cleaning
         staff, security, and receptionists. Economists Larry Katz and Alan Krueger have
         estimated that the share of US workers on alternative employment contracts rose from
         about 11 percent in 1995 to 16 percent by 2015, with much of the change coming from
         workers employed by contract agencies.11 According to economist David Weil, the rise
         of this form of work has contributed to increasing income inequality: as workplaces
         contract out a growing share of their activities, each supplier is expected to generate
         a financial return. Labor costs become an increasing share of overall costs further
         down the supply chain, which creates incentives to cut corners and pay workers
         lower wages.12

         One example of how the nature of contracts has evolved can be found in the relations
         between airlines and their staff in the European Union since the early 1990s. Although
         the sector has seen significant growth and positive outcomes for consumers driven
         by competition, jobs in aviation that used to be prestigious, full-time, and permanent
         contracts with a single employer are being replaced with more complex forms of
         employment, including agency work, self-employment, and zero-hour contracts.
         The European Transport Workers’ Federation says that “agency workers are far less
         likely to feel secure or enjoy work-life balance when compared with directly employed
         aircrew.” 13

         This shift particularly affects low-cost airlines’ cabin crews. As of 2019, 20 percent
         of cabin crew members and 18 percent of pilots in the European Union did not have
         a direct and permanent contract with a single carrier. These new contracts are
         overwhelmingly concentrated among low-cost airlines; 97 percent of cabin crew
         members contracted through an intermediary work for low-cost carriers. A majority
         of other airlines say they have not contracted aircrew through an intermediary
         (and saw no change in their organizations in this respect in recent years).14




         10
              See David Weil, The Fissured Workplace: Why Work Became So Bad for So Many and What Can Be Done to
              Improve It, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017.
         11
              See Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger, “The rise and nature of alternative work arrangements in the United
              States, 1995–2015,” ILR Review, March 2019, Volume 72, Issue 2.
         12
              See David Weil, “How to make employment fair in an age of contracting and temp work,” Harvard Business
              Review, March 24, 2017.
         13
              Briefing: Employment and working conditions in EU civil aviation, European Parliament, April 2016.
         14
              Study on employment and working conditions of aircrews in the EU internal aviation market, European
              Commission, 2019; Ulrich Schulte-Strathaus, “Is the European Commission fulfilling its ambitious aviation
              strategy?,” Air and Space Law, 2017, Volume 42, Issue 6.




52   McKinsey Global Institute


                                            High-wage and low-wage jobs increased, but middle-skill, middle-wage positions
                                            declined, increasing income polarization
                                            The employment picture in the countries in our sample varies considerably depending on
                                            workers’ skill levels. Both high-skill and low-skill employment has increased, while the middle
                                            has been squeezed (Exhibit 8). Between 2000 and 2018, middle-skill occupations dropped
                                            by seven million jobs in 16 European countries and United States. (We use “middle-skill” and
                                            “middle-wage” interchangeably in this chapter to capture the polarization of the labor market
                                            in the United States and European Union.)144

                                            Polarization is due in part to the shift from higher-productivity manufacturing to lower
                                            measured productivity service industry jobs, but the shift toward high-skill or low-skill jobs



Exhibit 8

Labor markets have been polarizing toward high- and low-skill occupations in Europe, and
high- and low-wage occupations in the United States.

Employment share
Million
                                                                                                                                                     Change in real
                                                                                                                                                    median wage in
Employment by skill level in 16 European                                       Employment by wage level in the United                                  the United
countries1                                                                     States2                                                              States, 2000–18
    100% = 167             180          181          187                          100% = 130               133         130         145

                                                                               High-                                                  +3 pp
                                                                               wage
                                                                                              20%         20%         22%         23% or                  7.3%
High-                                                    +4 pp                                                                        +7m
              39%         40%          42%
skill                                                43% or
                                                         +16m


                                                                               Middle-                                                -6 pp
                                                                               wage
                                                                                              54%         53%         49%         48% or                   1.1%
Middle-                                                   -7 pp                                                                       -1m
              35%         32%         30%            28% or
skill
                                                         -6m


                                                         +2 pp                                                                        +3 pp
Low-
skill
              27%         28%          28%           29% or                    Low-
                                                                               wage
                                                                                              26%         28%         29%         29% or                  5.3%
                                                         +10m                                                                         +8m

             2000         2006        2012           2018                                    2000        2006         2012        2018

1 N=16. Countries are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and
  United Kingdom.
2 Annual or annualized median wages. Wage thresholds for 2018 were low, <$30,000; middle, $30,000–$60,000; high, >$60,000. For occupations that pay hourly,

  assumes a 40-hour workweek. OES data for US workforce is not fully comprehensive (e.g., excludes farming employment and self-employed).
Note: We recognize skill level and wage level are not always correlated, but due to data availability, we compare middle-skill jobs in Europe and middle-wage jobs in the
  United States. Percentage point change in the share of high-, middle-, and low-skill workers may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
Source: European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (CEDEFOP); Bureau of Labor Statistics; Occupational Employment Statistics; McKinsey Global
        Institute analysis




                                            144
                                                  Most data sets measure skills on the basis of credentialed or professionalized abilities, educational attainment, grouping
                                                  of occupation categories, or wage level, which tends to leave out skilled workers (such as artisans) whose skills are not
                                                  measured in this way. Due to limited data across our sample and differences in classifying skills, we use “occupation
                                                  category” and “wage” interchangeably to capture the polarization of the labor market in the United States and the
                                                  European Union. For example, researchers such as David Autor recognize that middle-skill jobs are typically those in the
                                                  middle of the wage distribution in the United States. David Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and
                                                  Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32. For the European Union, we have used the OECD’s classification of high-,
                                                  middle-, and low-skill occupations to divide workers into these categories.




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         53


                           within industries has been even more significant.145 Between 2000 and 2018, middle-skill jobs
                           declined seven percentage points in 16 European countries, while high-skill and low-skill jobs
                           increased by four and two percentage points, respectively.146 In the United States, middle-
                           wage jobs declined six percentage points over the same period, while high-wage and low-
                           wage jobs both increased by three percentage points.147

                           Income inequality has also increased; the top quintile’s income share rose 1.2 percentage
                           points between 2000 and 2016 to 41.1 percent. By this measure, income inequality increased
                           in 12 out of 17 countries for which data are available; notable drops occurred in Belgium and
                           the United Kingdom. In addition, relative poverty rates for the working-age population (after
                           taxes and transfers) rose between 2000 and 2016 in 18 out of 20 countries for which data are
                           available, with the exception of Australia and Ireland.148 On average in the 22 countries, relative
                           poverty increased from 11.1 percent, or 62 million people, to 12.8 percent over that period,
                           representing 76 million people. Even countries that recovered relatively strongly following the
                           global financial crisis, such as Germany, Norway, and Sweden, faced substantial increases in
                           relative poverty rates.149




7.3%
                           In the United States, median wage for middle-skill jobs (proxied by middle-wage jobs) grew
                           by 1.1 percent between 2000 and 2018, whereas wages for high-skill and low-skill workers
                           grew much faster, at 7.3 and 5.3 percent, respectively. Using Bureau of Labor Statistics
                           major occupational groups, our analysis suggests that almost all middle-wage occupations,
                           including office and administrative support, construction, and education and training
Increase in wages for      jobs, faced slow employment, low wage growth, or both (Exhibit 9).150 Exceptions were
high-wage workers in the   arts (and related fields) and protective services, as well as transportation to some extent.
United States between      By contrast, three out of the four occupations that saw high employment and high wage
2000 and 2018              growth were those paying annual salaries greater than $60,000. They included occupations
                           requiring computer and mathematical skills, business and finance, and healthcare
                           practitioners. Those in low-wage occupations such as healthcare support generally faced
                           moderate employment, moderate wage growth, or both.151

                           The financial services sector in the United States is one example of an increasingly
                           polarized workforce. Nearly 43 percent of financial services jobs have the potential to be
                           automated by 2030.152 Automation has the potential to affect both high- and low-skill jobs.


                           145
                                 Measuring productivity, particularly in service sectors, is a challenge. It is difficult to quantify output in many service
                                 sectors, especially healthcare and education, and quality improvements such as new technologies can be tough to
                                 capture. See the technical appendix for further information. In addition, according to Alpert et al., the overall decline in
                                 job quality in the United States since the 1990s has partially been driven by the decline in manufacturing jobs, which have
                                 largely been replaced by lower-quality service jobs. See Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the
                                 promise of digitization, McKinsey Global Institute, February 2018; Daniel Alpert et al., The US private sector Job Quality
                                 Index, Cornell Law School, November 2019.
                           146
                                 One of the limitations of the data on occupational polarization is that we do not have longitudinal data that follows
                                 workers throughout their careers and tracks their changes across occupational categories. It is possible that many
                                 middle-skill workers are transitioning into higher-skill occupational categories, which may partially account for the
                                 growth in high-skill jobs and is not necessarily a negative development in the labor market. See the technical appendix
                                 for further information. See David Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May
                                 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32; OECD employment outlook 2017, OECD, 2017; and OECD Employment by Education Level,
                                 December 2019.
                           147
                                 European Center for the Development of Vocational Training (CEDEFOP) Skills Forecast database, 2019; Occupational
                                 Employment Statistics, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019.
                           148
                                 Economists Gerald Auten and David Splinter have contradicted the existing literature on inequality, particularly in the
                                 United States. They argue that there has been little to no change in the after-tax income share of the top 1 percent.
                                 See the technical appendix for further information. Gerald Auten and David Splinter, “Top 1 percent income tax shares:
                                 Comparing estimates using tax data,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 307–11. See also,
                                 “Economists are rethinking the numbers on inequality,” Economist, November 28, 2019.
                           149
                                 We use relative poverty in place of national poverty measures because it is a standardized, comparable metric across
                                 OECD countries. The OECD definition reflects the share of the working-age population earning less than 50 percent of
                                 household median income.
                           150
                                 We used the US Bureau of Labor Statistics 2018 Standard Occupational Classification System, which aggregates
                                 thousands of occupations into 23 major groups. We excluded military-specific occupations to be consistent with other
                                 analyses of changes in employment or wages by employment.
                           151
                                 Findings on the link between declining middle-skill jobs and the effect on wages are mixed. Some academics have found
                                 that the decline of middle-skill jobs has contributed to rising wages for low-skill jobs, thereby narrowing the gap between
                                 middle- and low-skill jobs. Other academics have found that job polarization has contributed to rising wage inequality,
                                 particularly between college-educated and non-college-educated workers. See the technical appendix for further
                                 information. See Michael Boehm, “Job polarisation and the decline of middle-class workers’ wages,” VoxEU, February
                                 2014; David Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32.
                           152
                                 A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.




54                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 9

In the United States, employment and wages rose for low- and high-wage occupations, while
middle-wage occupations saw mixed employment growth and stagnating wages between
2000 and 2018.

Employment and median real wage changes                                                       Bubble size                     High wage, >$60,000
in the United States1                                                                         represents share of             Middle wage, $30,000–$60,000
%                                                                                             employment, 2018                Low wage, <$30,000
    Employment, change 2000–18
                                                                                                                              Marginally attached and unemployed
    110

    100                               21
                                                                                      Rapid employment
                                                                                      and wage growth

    70
                                      Moderate employment                                      5
    60                                and/or wage growth

    50                                                   12                                            2
                                                                                                                        6
    40
                                                               17                                                            22
    30            3
                                                                    9

    20                                     23
                  8
                                                                                      7
        10
                      11         18                  16                      13
                                                                                      19                                                      20
        0                                                                                     4                                                            1
                                      10        14
    -10

    -20
                                                          15             Slow employment
    -30
                                                                         and/or wage growth
    -40
             -3        -2   -1        0     1        2        3          4        5       6        7       8   9   10   11     12   13   14    15     16       17   18

                                                                                                                             Median real wage, change 2000–18
Occupations
Highest to lowest 2018 wage

    1        Management                                             9        Arts, design, entertainment,                    17 Healthcare support
                                                                             sports, and media
    2        Computer and mathematical                                                                                       18 Sales and related
                                                                    10 Construction and extraction
    3        Legal                                                                                                           19 Building and grounds cleaning
                                                                    11       Installation, maintenance,                         and maintenance
    4        Architecture and engineering                                    and repair
                                                                                                                             20 Farming, fishing, and forestry
    5        Business and financial                                 12 Community and social service
             operations                                                                                                      21 Personal care and service
                                                                    13 Protective services
    6        Healthcare practitioners                                                                                        22 Food preparation
             and technical                                          14 Office and administrative support                        and serving related

    7        Life, physical, and social science                     15 Production                                            23 Marginally attached
                                                                                                                                and unemployed
    8        Education, training, and library                       16 Transportation and material moving



1 Median real wage level in 2018; we proxied median wages for marginally attached and unemployed by using unemployment benefit replacement rate for single person
  with no children who earned average wage prior to losing their job.
Note: Total of 22 occupations: 6 low wage (29 percent of total employment), 9 middle wage (48 percent), and 7 high wage (23 percent).
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Occupational Employment Statistics, 2018; OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                                The social contract in the 21st century                                                                              55


     Traditionally high-skill occupations such as equity traders are declining as financial services
     firms shift toward using trading algorithms and requiring software developers to manage their
     systems. Goldman Sachs estimates that it has automated 99 percent of equity trading jobs
     over the past 17 years by hiring high-skill software developers in place of equity traders.153 At
     the same time, the rise of digital-only banks is forecast to affect demand for middle-skill bank
     tellers, spurring financial services firms to shift their workforce toward higher-skill IT jobs and
     lower-skill call-center positions, contributing to increased polarization within this sector.154

     Incomes have stagnated for the average worker
     The 2008 financial crisis and the low-growth and at times uneven recovery that followed have
     taken a toll on income growth across advanced economies. Productivity growth has also been
     sluggish. This economic weakness, together with increased competition for low- and middle-
     skill jobs, contributed to stagnating incomes for many.155 Between 2000 and 2018, average
     real wages grew 0.7 percent per year on average in our 22 countries (Exhibit 10).156 Average
     wages grew by less than 0.5 percent per year in Belgium, Spain, Italy, and Japan. In Greece
     and Portugal, average wages declined by 0.2 percent per year on average. In Ireland, New
     Zealand, Norway, and South Korea, average wages grew by 1.5 percent or more per year.
     Over the same period, GDP growth averaged 1.6 percent per year, ranging from 0 percent in
     Greece to 4.5 percent in Ireland.157

     The aggregate wage growth figures mask substantial changes in average wage growth
     rates in the early 2000s compared with the late 2010s. In 1995–2000, average wages grew
     by 1.6 percent annually, but by 2013–18, the figure was 0.7 percent per year. Average real
     wage growth fell in 19 out of 22 countries during this period (the exceptions were Germany,
     New Zealand, and South Korea), with significant drops in Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and
     the United Kingdom.158 Prior MGI research has shown that approximately 25 percent of
     individuals in six countries (up to 150 million people) faced real income declines between
     1995—2005 and 2005—16 (Exhibit 11).159




     153
           Nanette Byrnes, “As Goldman embraces automation, even the masters of the universe are threatened,” MIT Technology
           Review, February 7, 2017.
     154
           Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2018.
     155
           See Era Dabla-Norris et al., Causes and consequences of income inequality: A global perspective, International
           Monetary Fund, 2015; Didem Tüzemen and Jonathan Willis, “The vanishing middle: Job polarization and workers’
           response to the decline in middle-skill jobs,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013; Adam
           Saunders, “Technology’s impact on growth and employment,” in The Age of Perplexity: Rethinking the World We Knew,
           Madrid, Spain: BBVA, Open Mind, Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial, 2018.
     156
           The US Bureau of Labor Statistics provides a breakdown of wages and nonwage benefits to estimate the total cost of
           employment. The median worker earns $0.40 per hour more in real terms in 2019 than in 2009, with wages and salaries
           declining from $18.80 per hour to $18.70 per hour, and benefits increasing from $8.70 per hour to $9.10 per hour. See the
           technical appendix for more information. See Employer costs for employee compensation: Compensation percentiles,
           Bureau of Labor Statistics, June 2019.
     157
           World Economic Outlook database, IMF, October 2019.
     158
           Recent statistics suggest that wage growth picked up in the United Kingdom and the United States, but the headline
           figures are typically quoted in nominal terms. In real terms, wage growth was lower in both countries. See the technical
           appendix for further information. See “UK wage growth picks up to 11-year high,” BBC News, August 2019; Employee
           earnings in the UK: 2019, UK Office for National Statistics, October 2019; Real average hourly earnings up 1.5 percent
           from August 2018 to August 2019, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, September 2019.
     159
           Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.




56   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 10

Average real wages stagnated while relative poverty increased.

                                                                                     CAGR                          Change in relative poverty rate
                               Change in 5-year CAGR of real                         1995–         CAGR            after taxes and transfers, share
                               average wages,1 1995–2000 vs                          2000,         2000–           of working-age population,2
                               2013–18, percentage points                              %            18, %          2000–16, percentage points       2000, %3

South Korea                                                                1.5          0.6            1.7                               1.6                           11.1

New Zealand                                                             1.2             0.4            1.6                        0.4                                  9.3

Germany                                                              0.8                0.7           0.8                                              3.5             6.7

Denmark                                                   -0.1                          1.3            1.3                                       2.6                   4.4

Japan                                                 -0.2                              0.3           0.0                       0.0                                    13.6

Spain                                                 -0.3                             -0.1           0.2                                                              NA

Netherlands                                          -0.3                               0.2           0.5                                        2.5                   6.3

Austria                                              -0.4                               0.8           0.6                            0.8                               8.8

France                                               -0.4                               1.1           1.0                                1.5                           7.0

Italy                                               -0.7                                0.9           0.1                                            3.2               10.7

Switzerland                                     -0.9                                    0.9           0.8                                                              NA

Belgium                                       -1.4                                      1.4           0.2                                      2.3                     7.0

Finland                                       -1.4                                      1.8           1.0                                  1.7                         5.5

United States                               -1.7                                        2.8           0.9                                  1.8                         13.7

Canada                                   -1.9                                           2.2            1.2                       0.2                                   12.2

Australia                              -2.2                                             2.0           0.9             -0.3                                             9.7

Norway                               -2.4                                               2.6           2.0                                              3.5             6.0

Sweden                             -2.6                                                 3.6            1.5                                             3.4             5.2

Portugal                          -2.7                                                  2.5          -0.2                                1.5                           11.1

Ireland                          -2.9                                                   3.4            1.5         -0.9                                                10.8

United Kingdom                   -2.9                                                   3.2           0.8                          0.5                                 9.6

Greece                          -3.0                                                    3.3          -0.2                                                    5.1       10.3

Weighted average4                                  -0.9                                 1.6           0.7                                  1.7                         11.1




1   N=22. Compound annual growth rate (CAGR) for average wages represents 5 years ending with date listed (e.g., 1995–2000 for 2000). Average wages are in 2018
    dollars, which have been converted using average exchange rate for 2018 and CPI for 2018.
2   Poverty rate after taxes and transfers is measured as share of working age population whose income falls below 50 percent of median household income of total
    population. Definition of poverty rate changes in 2012. To create a long time series, income definition prior to 2011 was used until 2011 and new income definition was
    used after 2012. Exceptions are Austria, Canada, and Finland, for which new income definition is available earlier than 2012. Data availability by country varies. Figures
    for most countries cover 2000–16. Exceptions are: Austria, 2007–16; Belgium, Portugal, Greece, 2004–16 ; Denmark, 2000–15; Finland, Norway, Sweden, 2000–17;
    Ireland, 2004–15; Japan, 2000–15; South Korea, 2006–17; New Zealand, 2000–14.
3   2000 or earliest year available.
4   Weighted average is average of full set of countries weighted by their share of total population aged 15 and over.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                              The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         57


Exhibit 11

Real net income fell for 20–25 percent of individuals in six countries, while wage growth
concentrated at the top.

Canada, France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom, and United States,
1995–20161
                                                                                           % of individuals whose real net income is not rising as
% of individuals whose real net income has declined 2                                      rapidly as that of individuals in next-richest income decile


               1995–2005                                    2005–16                                     1995–2005                                    2005–16

                    2 –3


                                                              20–25




                                                                                                                                                      55–60
                                                                                                           65–70


          15M–20M                                   125M–150M                                  420M–450M                                  350M–380M
                  people                                     people                                        people                                     people

         Trend is principally                         Trend is principally                          Trend is prevalent                        Trend is prevalent
       driven by middle-class                           driven by wage                            (>50% of individuals)                     (>50% of individuals)
         wage stagnation in                           stagnation in Italy                        for all countries except                  for all countries except
              Germany                                       and UK                                         France                              Canada and UK




1    Sample includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, UK, and US; outcomes shown are an average of sample countries, weighted by 2016 population. Calculated as
     percentage of deciles that saw average income rise slower than income of next-richest decile (i.e., 1 decile = 10%), between first and last year in specified time period,
     summed for all 6 G-7 countries included, and weighted by 2016 population.
2    Real net income is defined as net income adjusted for inflation using OECD CPI rates where 2017=100; net income is defined in UNU-WIDER database as income
     concept recommended by the Canberra Group including employee income, income from self-employment, income less expenses from rentals except rental of land,
     property income, and current transfers received (e.g., social insurance benefits from employers’ schemes).
Source: UNU-Wider Income Inequality database; OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                              Similarly, median income grew by just 0.4 percent annually between 2000 and 2016.
                                              Annual growth rates dropped from 1.4 percentage points in 1995—2000 to 0.2 point in
                                              2011—16, and in 16 out of 22 countries (except Austria, Belgium, Sweden, and Japan). Severe
                                              drops occurred in countries hit hardest by the global financial crisis: Greece, Spain, Ireland,
                                              and Italy. We do not have data on median wages for the sample countries over this period.
                                              Instead, we have used median equivalized net income as a proxy for changes in market
                                              incomes (both wages and income from capital) at the household level since the early 2000s.
                                              In addition to labor and capital income, median equivalized net income includes taxes paid
                                              to the government and transfers such as pensions, social security payments, disability or
                                              workers’ compensation, and unemployment benefits paid by the government. Recent MGI
                                              research found that although real market incomes were flat or fell for 65 to 70 percent of
                                              households in 25 advanced economies between 2005 and 2014, government transfers and
                                              tax policies helped to alleviate some of the burden on households’ disposable income. After
                                              taxes and transfers, 20 to 25 percent of households had flat or falling disposable income
                                              between 2005 and 2014, compared with 2 percent between 1993 and 2005.160



                                              160
                                                    Poorer than their parents? Flat and falling incomes in advanced economies, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2016.




58                                            McKinsey Global Institute


In the context of challenging labor market conditions in the aftermath of the global financial
crisis, public-sector spending for workers increased temporarily. Spending on public-sector
wages, unemployment, incapacity, training, and active labor market programs increased
from 14.0 percent of GDP in 2000 to 15.0 percent in 2012, before falling back to 14.1 percent
in 2018, on average, in our 22-country sample. Between 2000 and 2018, spending on
public-sector wages increased slightly, while spending on training as well as unemployment,
incapacity, and active labor market programs decreased slightly.161 However, spending on
unemployment, incapacity, and active labor market programs increased 0.4 percentage point
between 2000 and 2012. These relatively small increases in public-sector spending do not
appear to have been sufficient in counteracting declining outcomes for individuals.


Changing employment arrangements have led to an increasingly flexible
labor market
The disruptive trends outlined above have been accompanied by a shift in institutional
arrangements that made labor markets more flexible and have increased the responsibility of
individual workers for their own labor outcomes.162

Employment protection for both permanent and temporary workers decreased over the past
two decades. In theory, reducing employment protections for workers can help make the
labor market more flexible and dynamic, since it enables businesses to respond quickly to
changes in the business environment, while also enabling workers to find the jobs that best
match their skills. At the same time, lower employment protections are likely to increase the
economic risks for workers, who are more vulnerable to job displacement during difficult
economic times.163

Greater labor flexibility carries a human cost, including worse long-term economic outcomes,
increased health problems, and lower trust among laid-off workers compared with their
peers who were not laid off. A study by Columbia University found that employees who were
laid off during the 1982 recession in Germany earned 10 to 15 percent less 15 years later
than their counterparts who had not been laid off. In the United States, the magnitude was
15 to 20 percent. A study by the State University of New York found that laid-off employees
have an 83 percent higher chance of developing a new health condition in the year after
their termination than workers who were not laid off, while other studies have found that life
expectancy declines among those who have lost their jobs. University of Manchester research
found that workers in Britain who had been laid off were 4.5 percent less likely to trust other
people than those who had not been laid off, an effect that persisted ten years later.164

Businesses face negative repercussions for laying off workers, including negative (and long-
term) reputational costs, lower stock prices, and reductions in performance by employees
who survive the layoffs. A study by the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the University
of South Carolina found that layoffs affecting 1 percent of employees resulted in a 31 percent
increase in voluntary turnover on average after the initial downsizing. Stockholm University
and University of Canterbury researchers found that layoff survivors experienced a 41 percent
decline in job satisfaction, a 36 percent decline in job commitment, and a 20 percent decline


161
      For further discussion of declining public-sector spending on training, see Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transition in
      a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
162
      See Daron Acemoglu, It’s good jobs, stupid, Economics for Inclusive Prosperity, policy brief number 13, June 2019.
163
      “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation,” in OECD employment outlook
      2013, OECD, 2013.
164
      Johannes F. Schmieder, Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender, The long-term impact of job displacement in Germany
      during the 1982 recession on earnings, income, and employment, Columbia University Department of Economics
      discussion paper number 0910-07; Kate W. Strully, “Job loss and health in the US labor market,” Demography, May 2009,
      Volume 46, Number 2, pp. 221–46; James Lawrence, “(Dis)placing trust: The long-term effects of job displacement
      on generalized trust over the adult life course,” Social Science Research, March 2015, Volume 50, pp. 46–59; Jena
      McGregor, “Getting laid off can make people less trusting for years,” Washington Post, March 19, 2015. See also Charlie
      O. Trevor and Anthony J. Nyberg, “Keeping your headcount when all about you are losing theirs: Downsizing, voluntary
      turnover rates, and the moderating role of HR practices,” The Academy of Management Journal, April 2008, Volume 51,
      Number 2, pp. 259–76; Sandra J. Sucher and Shalene Gupta, “Layoffs that don’t break your company,” Harvard Business
      Review, May–June 2018.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                       59


       in performance.165 Other studies showed that layoffs adversely affect innovation (24 percent
       decline in new inventions after a layoff of 15 percent of staff at a Fortune 500 tech company)
       and increase defection of existing customers.166

       The empirical evidence on reducing employment protection legislation suggests a
       mixed picture. A few notable studies indicate that strict employment legislation reduces
       employment, while others find no evidence of an increase in unemployment as a result of
       these policies.167

       The OECD’s Index of Employment Protection attempts to quantify the extent to which
       employment legislation protects against individual and collective dismissals. It covers
       25 quantitative and qualitative indicators such as notification procedures, severance pay, and
       equal treatment of permanent and temporary workers, creating a composite metric ranging
       between 0 and 6, where 0 represents the lowest regulations and 6 represents the highest.

       According to this metric, in the 22 countries in our sample, employment protection for
       permanent workers fell from 2.1 to 2.0 on average between 2000 and 2013. For temporary
       workers, it declined from 1.7 to 1.5 over the same period. This drop (or no change) was
       consistent except in Australia, Belgium, Denmark, France, and New Zealand for permanent
       workers, and in Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom for temporary workers.168 This
       suggests that employment protection in the 22 countries is low and decreasing, which may
       have enabled companies to shed jobs during the global financial crisis. Lower employment
       protection after the financial crisis may have enabled companies to rehire workers at higher
       rates than pre-crisis peaks in most countries.




Employment protection
for permanent workers
declined in many countries
between 2000 and 2013.
       Another measure of the role of institutions is the proportion of workers covered by collective
       agreements. According to the OECD, collective agreements primarily cover wage levels and
       increases as well as nonworking conditions such as vacation arrangements, training, and
       employment protections, among other things.169 These agreements can be negotiated at the
       firm, sector, or national level.




       165
             Magnus Sverke, Johnny Hellgren, and Katharina Näswall. “No security: A meta-analysis and review of job insecurity and
             its consequences,” Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 2002.
       166
             Sandra J. Sucher and Shalene Gupta, “Layoffs that don’t break your company,” Harvard Business Review, May–June
             2018.
       167
             According to research by Bruno Amable and Ken Mayhew, employment protection is a double-edged sword. It enables
             companies to respond to fluctuations in demand, but it can cause companies to be reluctant to hire workers when
             economic conditions improve. See Bruno Amable and Ken Mayhew, “Unemployment in the OECD,” Oxford Review
             of Economic Policy, Summer 2011, Volume 27, Issue 2, pp. 207–20; Edward P. Lazear, “Job security provisions and
             employment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1990, Volume 105, Number 3, pp. 699–726; “Protecting jobs,
             enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation,” in OECD employment outlook 2013, OECD, 2013.
       168
             OECD Employment protection, 2019.
       169
             OECD employment outlook 2018, OECD, 2018.




60     McKinsey Global Institute


On average for the 22 countries, the share of workers covered by collective agreements
declined from 44 percent in 2000 to 38 percent in 2017. This was true in 14 out of
22 countries, the exceptions being Denmark, Finland, France, and Switzerland, while
Australia, Austria, Belgium, and Italy saw no change. Greece experienced the most substantial
decline: the share of workers covered by collective agreements there fell from 100 percent
to 25 percent. Austria had the highest share of workers at 98 percent in 2017. In the United
States, where just 14 percent of workers were covered by collective agreements in 2000,
that share fell to 12 percent by 2017.

Given that collective agreements primarily aim to increase wages and other forms of
compensation for workers, numerous academics suggest that this decline may have
contributed to wage stagnation and polarization in the labor market.170 Moreover, the
decoupling of wages from productivity is a continuation of a longer-term trend that started in
the 1980s. It implies that wage development is more closely linked to individual productivity
and the scarcity of skills rather than to a broader sharing of gains.171



Developments in the labor markets in OECD economies over the past two decades exemplify
some of the paradoxes of the evolving social contract. On the one hand, employment is up,
benefits have improved, and new opportunities beckon in the digital age. On the other hand,
a growing number of workers, especially those in middle-skill occupations, are having a harder
time keeping up. As we explore in the next chapter, the pressure on households that have not
experienced much income advancement also comes from the rising prices of basic consumer
goods, especially housing.




170
      See Ryan Nunn, Jimmy O’Donnell, and Jay Shambaugh, The shift in private sector union participation: Explanation and
      effects, The Hamilton Project, August 2019; “If wages are to rise, workers need more bargaining power,” Economist, May
      31, 2018.
171
      See Cyrille Schwellnus, Andreas Kappeler, and Pierre-Alain Pionnier, Decoupling of wages from productivity, OECD
      Economics Department working paper number 1373, January 31, 2017.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   61


© Getty images


3   Individuals as
    consumers
    Consumption ranks alongside labor as a core element of the social contract. The foremost
    issue is whether people can afford the basic necessities of everyday life, including housing,
    healthcare, and education, as well as food. Beyond that, within the constraints of income and
    savings, individuals expect to be able to sustain a certain level of discretionary consumption to
    achieve a decent standard of living. And they expect value for their money—that the quality of
    what they buy meets expectations. Economic progress for individuals thus manifests not only
    in the much-discussed employment opportunities and wage developments, but also in lower
    prices and in better access to and quality of goods and services.

    In this chapter, we examine how individuals in advanced economies have fared as consumers
    over the past two decades by looking at these three aspects: prices and affordability,
    access, and quality. Our study covers nine goods and services categories, which together
    account for three-quarters of total consumption in 20 out of 22 countries in our sample for
    which comparable data are available.172 The nine are communications, clothing, recreation,
    and furnishings, consumption of which is primarily discretionary in nature; transportation
    and food, which are mixed between discretionary and basic; and housing, healthcare, and
    education, which are primarily basic in nature.173

    We find that several global trends, notably technological progress and globalization, have
    substantially reduced prices for discretionary goods and services. Technology-enabled
    ease of market entry and deregulation of some consumer product markets have also played
    a role in pushing down the cost of some goods and services, such as communications, by
    spurring competition. However, this decline in prices does not apply to key basic goods
    and services. Indeed, the cost of housing, healthcare, and education has risen faster than
    general consumer prices over the past two decades, and in many countries these price rises
    are absorbing a large share—and in some countries, all—of the income gains that average
    households have earned. Outside the United States (where healthcare also plays a big role),
    this is mostly attributable to housing, which accounts for almost one-fourth of household
    consumption. In part, this is because of housing supply constraints in the face of higher
    demand. For example, zoning laws continue to restrict housing supply in fast-growing cities,
    while social housing offerings are mostly decreasing.174 This trend holds generally true in
    our sample countries, with some variations (Exhibits 12, 13, and 14). Changes in 15 European
    countries and the United States were fairly consistent, with the exception of transportation
    and healthcare. In Australia, consumer prices varied significantly, but the variation was
    modest in Canada and Japan. A look at France, Italy, and the United Kingdom shows how
    costs of discretionary goods and services declined relative to overall inflation, while housing
    was the primary driver of consumer price growth. Unlike discretionary goods and services,
    basics are primarily non-traded and operate in less competitive markets, in some cases with
    significant supply constraints despite growing demand.


    172
          Other category not analyzed includes restaurant and hotels, alcohol and tobacco, and miscellaneous goods and services.
          Consumer price data for New Zealand and Switzerland not included.
    173
          Food and clothing are arguably basic goods, but in advanced economies, the share of spending that is basic in nature is
          quite small.
    174
          Consumer prices of housing include actual rentals, maintenance, and utilities but exclude housing purchases or
          imputed rents (although house prices, rents, and mortgage interest costs could move differently over short periods, the
          relationship is strong in the long run). Healthcare consumer prices include medical products, outpatient services, and
          hospital services but exclude health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services). Education consumer
          prices include pre-primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary, and tertiary education as well as
          education not definable by level.




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   63


Exhibit 12

Consumer prices of discretionary goods and services such as communications fell
significantly, while basics such as housing outpaced general consumer prices: changes in
Europe and the United States were fairly consistent, except in healthcare and transportation.
                                                                                                                                                          Share of
Category consumer price vs all-items consumer price index
                                                                                                                                                          spending
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), 2002–18, indexed to 2002, percentage points
                                                                                                                                                             %
                           70

                           60

                           50                                                                                         48         Education                      1
                           40

                           30
                                                                                                                      24         Housing                       24
                           20
                                                                                                                      15         Other                         23
                            10                                                                                        12         Transportation                14
15 European                                                                                                           5          Healthcare                     4
countries1                   0                                                                                         1         Food                          11

                           -10
                                                                                                                      -15        Furnishings                    6
                          -20
                                                                                                                      -27        Recreation                     9
                          -30
                                                                                                                      -36        Clothing                       5
                          -40

                          -50                                                                                       -48          Communications                 3
                                 2002       04        06        08        10        12        14        16      2018


                           70                                                                                         70         Education                      3

                           60

                           50

                           40
                                                                                                                      35         Healthcare                     9
                           30
                                                                                                                      26         Housing                       25
                           20                                                                                         22         Other                         13

                            10
United States                0                                                                                        -2         Food                           8
                           -10                                                                                        -8         Transportation                19
                          -20

                          -30                                                                                         -35        Clothing                       4
                                                                                                                      -36        Recreation                     8
                          -40                                                                                         -44        Communications                 3
                                                                                                                      -46        Furnishings                    8
                          -50
                                 2002       04        06        08        10        12        14        16      2018
1 Consumption-weighted average of Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and
  United Kingdom (data not included for Switzerland).
Note: Value of 0 can be interpreted as “consumer prices in this category match all-items consumer price index.” Others category includes alcohol and tobacco, restaurants
  and hotels, and miscellaneous goods and services; omitted for Japan due to missing data, representing 25% of consumption. Housing includes actual rentals,
  maintenance, and utilities but excludes housing purchases or imputed rents. Healthcare includes medical products, outpatient services, and hospital services but
  excludes health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services). Education includes pre-primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary,
  and tertiary education, and education not definable by level.
Source: Eurostat; Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




64                                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 13

Consumer prices in Canada and Japan witnessed relatively moderate variations, compared
with Australia.
                                                                                                                                                           Share of
Category consumer price vs all-items consumer price index                                                                                                  spending
Consumer price index (CPI), 2002–18, indexed to 2002, percentage points                                                                                       %

                                                                                                                          72      Education                      4
                            60                                                                                            63      Healthcare                     6


                            40                                                                                                    Housing                       22
                                                                                                                          36
                            20

Australia                     0                                                                                                   Food                          10
                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                                          -16     Transportation                11
                          -20
                                                                                                                          -35     Furnishings                    5
                          -40                                                                                             -38     Recreation                    10

                                                                                                                       -57        Clothing                       4
                          -60
                                                                                                                       -61        Communications                 3
                                  2002       04        06        08         10        12        14        16       2018

                            60

                            40                                                                                                    Education                      1
                                                                                                                          36

                            20                                                                                                    Food                          10
                                                                                                                          9
                                                                                                                          8       Housing                       24
Canada                        0                                                                                           6       Transportation                15
                                                                                                                          -7      Communications                 2
                                                                                                                          -8      Healthcare                     4
                          -20                                                                                             -33     Recreation                     9
                                                                                                                          -36     Furnishings                    6
                          -40                                                                                             -39     Clothing                       4

                          -60
                                  2002       04        06        08         10        12        14        16       2018

                            60

                            40

                                                                                                                           10     Food                          14
                            20                                                                                              7     Transportation                10
                                                                                                                            1     Clothing                       3
                                                                                                                            1     Healthcare
Japan                         0                                                                                            -4                                    4
                                                                                                                           -6     Education                      2
                                                                                                                          -14     Housing                       26
                          -20                                                                                                     Recreation                     8
                                                                                                                          -24
                                                                                                                                  Communications                 3
                                                                                                                          -28
                          -40                                                                                                     Furnishings                    5

                          -60
                                  2002       04        06        08         10        12        14        16       2018


Note: Value of 0 can be interpreted as “consumer prices in this category match all-items consumer price index.” Others category omitted due to missing data,
  representing 25% of consumption. Housing includes actual rentals, maintenance, and utilities but excludes housing purchases or imputed rents. Healthcare includes
  medical products, outpatient services, and hospital services but excludes health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services). Education includes pre-
  primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary, and tertiary education, and education not definable by level.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics; Statistics Canada; Japan Statistics Bureau; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    65


Exhibit 14

Consumer prices in 3 European countries: France and Italy witnessed relatively moderate
variations between categories, while prices of education in the United Kingdom soared.

                                                                                                                                                          Share of
Category consumer price vs all-items consumer price index                                                                                                 spending
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), 2002–18, indexed to 2002, percentage points                                                                      %
                                                                                                                      27         Education                    1
                           30
                                                                                                                      25         Housing                     26
                           20                                                                                         17         Other                       22
                            10                                                                                        14         Transportation              14

                             0                                                                                        -3         Healthcare                     4
                                                                                                                      -6         Food                          13
                           -10
France                                                                                                                -13
                          -20                                                                                                    Furnishings                    5
                                                                                                                      -25        Clothing                       4
                          -30
                                                                                                                      -35        Recreation                     8
                          -40
                          -50
                                                                                                                      -57        Communications                 3
                          -60
                          -70
                                 2002       04        06        08        10        12        14        16      2018

                           30                                                                                         21         Housing                       22
                                                                                                                      15         Transportation                13
                           20                                                                                                    Other                         23
                                                                                                                      13
                            10                                                                                         9         Healthcare                     3
                                                                                                                       7         Education                      1
                             0                                                                                         3         Food                          15
                           -10                                                                                        -6         Furnishings                    7
                                                                                                                      -15        Recreation                     7
Italy                     -20
                          -30                                                                                         -30        Clothing                       7
                          -40
                          -50
                          -60
                          -70                                                                                           -71      Communications                 2
                                 2002       04        06        08        10        12        14        16      2018

                         200
                                                                                                                      190        Education                      1
                          175

                          125
                          100
                            75
United Kingdom             50                                                                                       41           Housing                       27
                                                                                                                    20           Transportation                14
                            25                                                                                      13           Healthcare                     1
                             0                                                                                      12           Other                         26
                                                                                                                     4           Food                           9
                          -25                                                                                      -19           Furnishings                    5
                                                                                                                   -25           Communications                 2
                          -50                                                                                      -38           Recreation                    10
                          -75                                                                                       -69          Clothing                       5
                                 2002       04        06        08        10        12        14        16      2018

Note: Value of 0 can be interpreted as “consumer prices in this category match all-items consumer price index.” Others category includes alcohol and tobacco, restaurants
  and hotels, and miscellaneous goods and services. Housing includes actual rentals, maintenance, and utilities but excludes housing purchases or imputed rents.
  Healthcare includes medical products, outpatient services, and hospital services but excludes health insurance (which is part of miscellaneous goods and services).
  Education includes pre-primary and primary, secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary, and tertiary education, and education not definable by level.
Source: Eurostat; Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




66                                         McKinsey Global Institute


3%
                            Prices of discretionary goods and services have fallen due to
                            technological innovation, globalization, and deregulation
                            Between 2002 and 2018, overall consumer prices increased by 33 percent on average in
                            20 countries, as measured by the European Central Bank’s Harmonised Index of Consumer
Decline in prices of        Prices and national consumer price indexes. The prices of discretionary goods and services
discretionary goods         (including communications, clothing, recreation, and furnishings), which constitute a
and services in absolute    22 percent share of spending, declined in absolute terms by 3 percent.
terms between 2002 and
2018, a time when overall   Compared with the general price level, communications prices have fallen by 43 percentage
consumer prices increased   points, furnishings by 33 percentage points, clothing by 31 percentage points, and recreation
by 33 percent on average,   by 30 percentage points on average in the 20 countries. Prices decreased in absolute
according to the ECB        terms for communications, where clothing, furnishings, and recreation tracked general
                            consumer prices.

                            Holding all else constant, the average person can work six fewer weeks a year (about
                            15 percent of total working time) and still consume the same amount in these categories in ten
                            sample countries.175 This has drastically improved affordability of and access to these goods;
                            for instance, between 2012 and 2017, data usage surged tenfold in nine countries.176

                            These price changes were driven by productivity gains across the supply chain due to
                            advances in technology and globalization.177 With the rise of digital and mobile technology, in
                            particular, the nature of consumption in discretionary goods and services is evolving rapidly,
                            and innovative products and delivery methods including the sharing economy are bolstering
                            access and quality in many categories.

                            A key driver has been the internet. The price of an internet connection has fallen—between
                            2012 and 2017, the cost of one gigabyte of data dropped by 89 percent in nine countries. This
                            has unlocked a wealth of new consumption, often at low or no monetary cost to consumers,
                            of products such as social media and information services, and has made it simpler to access
                            goods. E-commerce has cut distribution and storage costs.178 In other sectors, such as
                            recreation, savings from automation are being passed on to consumers, leading to significant
                            price decreases.

                            The sharing economy enabled by the spread of digital platforms has also introduced flexible
                            methods of consumption in many categories of goods. For example, car sharing has allowed
                            people to use a vehicle only when they need to, while e-commerce sites have given people
                            access to a wider array of goods and services with quick delivery.

                            The combination of falling prices, better access, and improving quality has led to an increase
                            in consumer surplus, the wedge between what consumers are willing to pay and what they do
                            pay. One example is Skype, the cost-free international phone service, which saved consumers
                            around the world $150 billion in international phone charges from 2005 to 2013, and about
                            $37 billion in 2013 alone.179 An OECD paper estimated that from 2006 to 2010, quality and
                            price changes in the broadband market led to a $1,035 increase in consumer surplus per
                            subscriber on average for 22 countries, or a growth of 52 percent annually.180 Another study
                            shows that median users would require compensation of $17,530 to forgo search engines for
                            a year; similarly, users say they would need $8,414 to lose access to email and $3,648 to go
                            without digital maps for that same period.181


                            175
                                  Holding constant volume of goods and services consumed, prices of other goods and services, and wages in real terms.
                            176
                                  Strategic Analytics data, 2018.
                            177
                                  For further details, see Susan N. Houseman and Michael J. Mandel, Measuring globalization: Better trade statistics for
                                  better policy, Volume 1, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2015.
                            178
                                  Jean-Paul Rodrigue, “Comparison between retail and e-commerce cost structures for a $150 apparel piece,” in The
                                  Geography of Transport Systems, fourth edition, New York, NY: Routledge, 2017.
                            179
                                  Playing to win: The new global competition for corporate profits, McKinsey Global Institute, September 2015.
                            180
                                  Shane Greenstein and Ryan McDevitt, Measuring the broadband bonus in thirty OECD countries, OECD, 2012. Refers to
                                  average increase in consumer surplus for Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, Sweden, the United
                                  Kingdom, and the United States.
                            181
                                  Erik Brynjolfsson, Avinash Collis, and Felix Eggers, “Using massive online choice experiments to measure changes in
                                  well-being,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, March 2019, Volume 116, Number 15.



                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   67


     Transportation is another area in which innovation has played a major role in improving quality
     and providing greater choice. Prices were relatively volatile within a limited band between
     2002 and 2018 due to energy price changes related to the global financial crisis and to the
     rise and fall of oil prices during the commodity supercycle. Digital platforms have spurred
     a flurry of new transportation services including taxi sharing and smart electric scooters,
     among others. Other urban mobility tools have improved transportation services in major
     cities. For example, in New York, London and Tokyo, commute times could fall by up to
     15 percent by 2025 thanks to real-time public transit information, predictive maintenance,
     intelligent traffic signals, and other innovations.182

     Apart from innovation, globalization has increased competition in traded goods such as
     clothing and furnishings, which led to significant price improvements. China, Vietnam, and
     other emerging economies have become key lower-cost manufacturing centers, and this has
     both driven down prices and increased offerings to consumers. Imports in OECD economies
     grew from 22 percent of GDP in 1999 to 29 percent in 2018.183


     Tech-enabled entry and deregulation in telecommunications, retail, and
     transportation markets created new competition
     Alongside global forces such as technology innovation and globalization, institutional moves
     to deregulate markets for some discretionary goods and the reduction of trade barriers to
     allow competition to thrive have played a role in improving outcomes for consumers.

     Between 2000 and 2013, the OECD index for product-market regulation fell for
     telecommunications, transportation (road and rail), and utilities (gas and electricity) by
     33 percent on average for 22 OECD economies.184 Retail price controls also fell by 26 percent
     during the same period, with the average score for 22 countries declining from 2.1 to 1.5 out of
     a maximum of 6.0.185

     This deregulation occurred on several fronts but was concentrated on opening public
     monopolies to competition. One estimate finds almost 290 instances of major market access,
     market structure, or public sector reform in our 22 sample countries between 1980 and
     2013.186 For example, Germany alone underwent more than one major product-market reform
     every two years. This included privatizing national airline Lufthansa in 1998 and postal service
     Deutsche Post in 2001. Other reforms included liberalization of road and utility sectors, for
     example, by enforcing the opening up of local electricity grids to competitors in 1998. This
     deregulation increased competition and productivity and has driven down prices.187

     Consumers have been among the biggest beneficiaries of industry disruption. In automobiles,
     for example, global consumer surplus for midsize cars increased by $30 billion between
     2000 and 2014, equivalent to 23 percent of annual sales in the segment.188 Between
     2000 and 2010, the market price of a Toyota Camry in the United States fell by 1 percent a
     year, while $1,400 of content was added, with fuel efficiency improving.189




     182
           Smart cities: Digital solutions for a more livable future, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2018.
     183
           Imports of goods and services, World Bank, 2019.
     184
           The index measures product-market regulation on a scale of 0 to 6); the average of sector indexes fell from 3.1 to 2.1.
           Methodology for 2018 data has been changed and is not comparable to earlier periods.
     185
           Retail price control on goods such as milk, bread, tobacco, alcohol, and gasoline.
     186
           Romain A. Duval et al., A narrative database of major labor and product market reforms in advanced economies, IMF
           working paper number 18/19, 2018. The paper defines a reform as major if it meets one of three conditions: (1) the
           OECD Economic Survey uses strong normative language to define the action taken; (2) the policy action is mentioned
           repeatedly across different editions of the OECD Economic Survey; or (3) when available, the existing OECD indicator of
           the regulatory stance in the area considered displays a very large change.
     187
           Estimates show that productivity in product markets is 13 percent higher and prices 14 percent lower over the five-year
           period after a major reform. See Romain Bouis, Romain A. Duval, and Johannes Eugster, Product market deregulation
           and growth: New country-industry-level evidence, IMF working paper number 16/114, 2016.
     188
           Playing to win: The new global competition for corporate profits, McKinsey Global Institute, September 2015.
     189
           Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization, McKinsey Global Institute, February
           2018.


68   McKinsey Global Institute


Global competition and trade also bring disproportionate gains to lower-income groups. One
estimate shows that on average, real income loss from closing off trade is 63 percent for the
lowest income decile, compared with 28 percent for the highest income decile.190 In the United
States, the payoff from trade expansion, stemming from policy liberalization and improved
transportation and communications technology, is estimated to have been $2.1 trillion
between 1950 and 2016; this is equivalent to a GDP per household increase from $7,014 to
$18,131.191 Other research estimates that the United States received $260 billion in value from
the increasing variety of goods arising from globalization between 1972 and 2001.192

Overall, price decreases are steepest in markets that are most exposed to technology,
globalization, and deregulation, such as communications, while sectors less exposed to these
trends have improved less significantly.193


The rising cost of housing absorbs a growing share of household income
for many
Unlike discretionary goods and services, the cost of basics has been a major driver of the
increase in consumer prices across countries in our sample. Of the 33 percent increase in
general prices between 2002 and 2018 in 20 countries on average, housing alone explains
37 percent of the total increase (Exhibits 15 and 16). Given that housing represents by far the
largest single category of spending—at 24 percent on average, with the proportion varying by
country from 17 to 28—price changes have significant effects on consumers.

In the United States, more than in Europe, healthcare was an important driver of general
consumer prices, representing 17 percent of the total change between 2002 and 2018.
Education prices have increased notably in some countries, too. However, because education
represents just a 2 percent share of spending on average, its effect on general consumer
prices is relatively limited.

Looking at the three categories, relative to general consumer prices and unweighted by share
of consumption, the costs of education, housing, and healthcare rose 52 percentage points,
21 percentage points, and 19 percentage points faster, respectively, from 2002 to 2018.
Holding all else constant, consumers in ten sample countries would now have to work an
additional four weeks a year to be able to afford the same amount of housing, healthcare, and
education that they did two decades ago.194

These price increases for housing, healthcare, and education have offset increases in real
income in many countries—increases that were already slowing, as discussed in the previous
chapter. As shown in Exhibit 17, increased spending on basic goods and services eroded
between 26 and 107 percent of incremental incomes in seven countries where real incomes
rose in the period 2000 to 2017.195 The United Kingdom saw the largest erosion at 107 percent
of income gains, followed by France with 87 percent of incremental income. In six out of seven
countries, housing was the largest driver of spending change; only in the United States was
healthcare most significant.196 Moreover, this erosion in incremental income was primarily
driven by price changes; volume and other changes were relatively limited in most countries.


190
      Pablo Fajgelbaum and Amit Khandelwal, “Measuring the unequal gains from trade,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      August 2016, Volume 131, Number 3.
191
      Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Zhiyao Lucy Lu, The payoff to America from globalization: A fresh look with a focus on costs to
      workers, Peterson Institute for International Economics policy brief number 17-16, 2017.
192
      Christian Broda and David Weinstein, “Are we underestimating the gains from globalization for the United States?,”
      Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 2005, Volume 11, Number 4.
193
      For further discussion of competition, see Globalization in transition: The future of trade and value chains, McKinsey
      Global Institute, January 2019.
194
      Holding constant volume of goods and services consumed, prices of other goods and services, and wages in real terms.
195
      For income, we consider the OECD data on household net adjusted disposable income, which includes wages and
      salaries, property income, social benefits in cash, and social transfers in kind (which also include healthcare-related
      transfers). The breakdown of household consumption is based on OECD national accounts data, which includes only
      household spending (excludes government spending) on various categories, including healthcare. See the technical
      appendix for details.
196
      If we include total household income and household healthcare spending, we find that average income in the United
      States increased by 29 percent (from $92,000 to $119,000), while healthcare spending increased by 63 percent (from
      $14,000 to $23,000), for example.


The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   69


Exhibit 15

Changes in housing prices explain 37 percent of general inflation in 20 countries between
2002 and 2018.

Breakdown of Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices                                                                                                          Share of
(HICP) by share of spend in each category                                                                                                               consumption
Percent, consumption-weighted average of 20 countries1                                                                                                    spend, %

General inflation, 2002–18                                                                                                              100% = 33

Housing                                                                                                                  37%                                    24

Transport                                                                                                          14%                                          15

Other (miscellaneous goods and services)                                                                   12%                                                  9

Other (restaurants and hotels)                                                                      10%                                                         8

Food                                                                                           10%                                                              11

Healthcare                                                                               9%                                                                     6

Other (alcohol and tobacco)                                                         6%                                                                          3

Education                                                                       5%                                                                              2
Discretionary (communications, clothing,
                                                                     -3%                                                                                        22
recreation, and furnishings)
1    Adjusted for difference between actual overall inflation growth and estimated consumption based on category breakdown. Data for Australia, Canada, Japan, and
     South Korea reflects national consumer price index (CPI).
Source: Eurostat; Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices; Japan Statistics Bureau; Australia Bureau of Statistics; Statistics Canada; OECD;
        McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            In Italy, Japan, and Spain, incomes fell and were further eroded by 6 to 29 percent, primarily
                                            through increased spending on housing. Both price and volume changes drove this change
                                            in Spain and Japan. In Italy, consumers cut down on volume of housing, healthcare, and
                                            education, but price increases meant that overall expenditure on basics still increased.

                                            The rising cost of housing, as well as education and healthcare, has pushed up the share of
                                            basics in total consumption for households across the income distribution, and especially
                                            for low-income households.197 Between 2000 and 2017, average households in Germany,
                                            Spain, and the United States saw the proportion of housing, healthcare, and education rise
                                            by six percentage points of household consumption expenditure (from 37 to 43 percent). The
                                            effect has been most severe in the lowest income groups; for them, basics as a proportion of
                                            household consumption expenditure rose by nine percentage points (from 40 to 49 percent).
                                            That compares with a rise of three percentage points (from 36 to 39 percent) for the highest
                                            income group.




                                            197
                                                  Whether there is an optimal level of share of basics in household consumption is a subject of debate. The OECD and
                                                  Eurostat consider 40 percent the threshold for housing cost overburden rate. The US Census Bureau refers to those
                                                  spending 30 percent or more of their income on housing costs as cost burdened, while those spending 50 percent or
                                                  more are severely cost burdened. For further details, see Mary Schwartz and Ellen Wilson, Who can afford to live in a
                                                  home? A look at data from the 2006 American Community Survey, US Census Bureau, 2008.




70                                          McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 16

In Europe and the United States, changes in housing prices explain 39 percent of general
consumer prices, while transportation and healthcare account for 17 percent each.

Breakdown of increase in Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) by share of spend in each category
2012–18, percent1
                    Basics: Housing, healthcare, and education  Discretionary      Food, transportation, and other
                                                                Share of                                                                     Share of
                                                              consumption                                                                  consumption
15 European countries2                                          spend, %            United States                                            spend, %
     100 = 31                                                                               100 = 39




           39         Housing                                        24                          39       Housing                              25




           17         Transportation                                  14                         17       Healthcare                           9



           12         Other (miscellaneous goods                      12                                  Transportation                       19
                                                                                                 13
                      and services)

           10         Others (restaurants and hotels)                 8                          9        Other (restaurants and hotels)        7

                                                                                                 7        Food                                 8
           10         Food                                            11
                                                                                                 7        Education                            3
           9          Other (alcohol and tobacco)                     4                                   Other (miscellaneous goods and       5
                                                                                                 7
      3               Healthcare                                      4                                   services)
                2     Education                                       1                               4   Other (alcohol and tobacco)           2
      -2              Discretionary (communications,                 22                     -3            Discretionary (communications,       22
                      clothing, recreation, and                                                           clothing, recreation, and
                      furnishings)                                                                        furnishings)

1   Adjusted for difference between actual overall consumer price growth and estimated consumption based on category breakdown.
2   Consumption-weighted average.
Source: Eurostat; Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                          The social contract in the 21st century                                                                    71


Exhibit 17

A significant amount of income gains was spent on basic goods and services,
primarily housing.

Income and spending changes for average households, 2000 –171
Indexed to income in starting year, %

                  Income                   Share of income change spent on basics,2                                                             Total share of
                  change,                  2000–17                                                                   Final income               income change
                  2000–17                  Housing          Healthcare         Education                             change, 2017               spent on basics2
                     100 = $7
United
                                                                                                                                                          107
Kingdom
                                                   -81                       -8                       -18                        -7
                     100 = $6
France                                                                                                                                                     87
                                                                                                                                 13
                                                   -75                      -10                        -2

United              100 = $29
     100                                                                                                                        46                         54
States                                             -18
       0                                                                    -34                        -3
        -100
   -200             100 = $29
     100
Australia                                                                                                                       46                         54
        0                                         -33                        -11                      -10
        -100
   -200             100 = $16
    100                                                                                                                          57
Germany                                                                                                                                                    43
      0                                           -32                        -8                        -2
        -100
   -200             100 = $29
    100                                                                                                                          62
Canada                                                                                                                                                     38
       0                                           -27                       -8                        -4
        -100
                    100 = $48
    100
   -200                                                                                                                          74
Sweden                                                                                                                                                     26
      0                                           -24                        -1                        -0

        -100
         100
   -2000
Spain                                                                                                                                                      29
    -100
                   -100 = -$15                    -26                                                  -1
     -200                                                                    -3                                                -129
      100
       0
Japan                                                                                                   3                                                  11
    -100
                    -100 = -$7                     -9                        -5                                                 -111
     -200
      100
          0
Italy                                                                         2                         1                                                   6
        -100
                   -100 = -$18                     -8                                                                          -106
     -200



1 Values expressed in real terms (i.e., adjusted for general consumer price increase). Starting date for Australia and Spain is 2001. Germany, Japan, Sweden, and UK
  databased on an average of results from OECD national accounts and household budget surveys (UK income change is based only on household budget survey due to
  data inconsistencies); figures for remaining countries are based on OECD national accounts due to data availability.
2 We defined basic goods and services as housing, healthcare, and education.

Note: Household incomes rose between 2000 and 2017 in some countries. Household income can be affected by changes in tax rates or government transfers and
  incorporates other forms of income such as capital income. All of these factors can contribute to a rise in household income (incremental income) while growth in wages
  and salaries is low or negative. Not to scale. Figures may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
Source: OECD national accounts data; Eurostat household budget surveys; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




72                                         McKinsey Global Institute


                              A closer look at housing, healthcare, and education costs highlights some
                              improvements in quality outcomes
                              Housing takes up the largest proportion of household expenditure and is where consumers
                              have felt the largest impact of the rising cost of basics.198 The supply of housing has been
                              constrained in major cities by strict zoning, building and density regulations, and opposition
                              to new home construction from existing home owners.199 This is further exacerbated by
                              stagnation of social housing stock, which fell slightly from 10.9 percent to 10.4 percent of total
                              stock on average for our 22 countries. Government social spending on housing has remained
                              flat at 0.4 percent of GDP while overall infrastructure spending has declined slightly from
                              3.5 percent to 3.1 percent on average.200 At the same time, regulations have not been able to
                              curtail rent increases or stem housing price increases fueled by financial speculation.




43%
                              Meanwhile, housing demand in major cities has continued to increase, especially in superstar
                              cities.201 Lower income groups and the young are the hardest hit in the housing market. The
                              cost of a minimally acceptable house is 43 percent of disposable income for households in the
                              poorest income quintiles, compared with 7 percent of income for households in the richest
Share of disposable income    households; for young people (between 15 and 30 years old), that cost represents 23 percent
that low-income households    of income versus 14 percent for people 65 and over.202
spend on minimal acceptable
housing, compared with 7%     One example is San Francisco, which is facing an acute shortage of homes. There, 68 percent
for wealthiest households     of households find rent for a minimum acceptable home unaffordable—defined as more
                              than 30 percent of household income.203 In Melbourne, 49 percent of households find rent
                              unaffordable, while the ratio ranges between 28 and 36 percent in London, Munich, Paris,
                              and Tokyo. In Denver and Madrid, by contrast, only 4 and 8 percent of households find
                              rent unaffordable.

                              Previous MGI research highlights the phenomenon of affordable housing issues exacerbating
                              gaps in economic infrastructure. As urban populations expand, current trends suggest that
                              there could be seven million additional low-income urban households by 2025 in developed
                              economies. Replacing today’s inadequate housing and building the additional units needed
                              would require up to $1 trillion in spending, including the costs of land and construction.204

                              While prices increased, the basic quality of housing improved: overcrowding fell from
                              9.1 percent to 8.0 percent on average in our sample countries between 2005 and 2017.205
                              However, for the lowest income quintile, the average rate of overcrowding increased
                              from 20 percent in 2005 to 21 percent in 2017 in six European countries for which data
                              are available.206

                              One result of higher housing prices is that young people are more likely to stay with their
                              parents than previous generations, partly also due to higher youth unemployment rates. In the
                              United Kingdom, 46 percent of 25-year-old individuals born from 1986 to 1990 live with their


                              198
                                    A hypothesis put forward by Yale economist Robert Shiller states that inflation-adjusted housing prices are relatively
                                    stable across time but volatile due to bubbles. Tracking housing prices in the United States between 1890 and 2006
                                    anticipated the housing crisis that triggered the global financial crisis. Similarly, the Herengracht Index developed by Piet
                                    Eichholtz for the Netherlands between 1628 and 1973 shows significant variations against a stable mean.
                              199
                                    For further details, see Housing affordability: A supply-side tool kit for cities, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2017.
                              200
                                    OECD social expenditure database, simple average of 22 focus countries; OECD statistics on general government gross
                                    capital formation.
                              201
                                    Superstars: The dynamics of firms, sectors, and cities leading the global economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October
                                    2018.
                              202
                                    See Tackling the world’s affordable housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2014. What constitutes
                                    minimum socially acceptable housing varies from country to country but includes factors such as distance to work,
                                    access to a working toilet, and minimum space requirements.
                              203
                                    Varies by country. See A blueprint for addressing the global affordable housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute,
                                    October 2014.
                              204
                                    A blueprint for addressing the global affordable housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2014.
                              205
                                    A person is considered to be living in an overcrowded household if the household does not have at its disposal a minimum
                                    number of rooms equal to: one room for the household; one room per couple in the household; one room for each single
                                    person aged 18 or over; one room per pair of single people of the same gender between 12 and 17 years of age; one room
                                    for each single person between 12 and 17 years of age not included in the previous category; and one room per pair of
                                    children under 12 years of age.
                              206
                                    Eurostat, 2019.




                              The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         73


                            parents, compared with 27 percent of those born between 1946 and 1950 when they were
                            25 years old.207

                            In healthcare, prices are climbing while institutional involvement is falling, as people
                            increasingly rely on private healthcare in the face of strained public systems. As populations
                            age and new (better but costlier) treatments are offered, governments are having to spend
                            more on healthcare; social healthcare spending increased in 19 of our 22 sample countries,
                            from 5.3 percent of GDP in 2000 to 6.4 percent in 2016 on average.

                            Healthcare prices increased sharply in Australia and the United States, by 63 and
                            35 percentage points above the all-items consumer price index from 2002 to 2018. They
                            notably climbed in Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United Kingdom, but rose more
                            moderately elsewhere in Europe and in Canada, Japan, and South Korea. People in the United
                            States are most exposed to the increases due to the relatively large proportion of household
                            consumption healthcare represents. Ten percent of household spending is allocated to
                            healthcare in the United States, compared with a healthcare spending range of between
                            2 and 6 percent in other countries that rely more on public funding.



$34,063
                            Increased availability of new medical technology and consolidation in the drug and medical
                            industries have also contributed to the rise in costs.208 In the United States, for example, the
                            average price of laparoscopic appendectomy procedures more than doubled from $8,570 in
Average price of a knee     2003 to $20,192 in 2016; similarly, the average price of knee replacement increased from
replacement in the United   $19,595 to $34,063 in the same period.209
States in 2016, compared
with $19,595 in 2003        Rising costs have accompanied rising quality of healthcare in some respects. Life expectancy
                            at 65 has increased from 18 to 20 years on average over the past two decades in the
                            22 countries in our sample, and the mortality from cancer decreased by an average of
                            15 percent between 2000 and 2016. Diabetes mortality also declined, by 20 percent between
                            2000 and 2015.210 Technology promises to drive further improvements with innovations such
                            as predictive diagnosis algorithms, health monitor implants, and synthetic biology.

                            Even as the financial strains on public healthcare systems increase, individual spending
                            on healthcare is rising. In 18 of our 22 focus countries, out-of-pocket healthcare spending
                            increased as a percentage of GDP between 2000 and 2017; the exceptions were France,
                            Germany, the Netherlands, and the United States.

                            Many public health systems are facing pressures, including longer waiting times for
                            treatment, prompting the move toward voluntary healthcare programs. In the United
                            Kingdom, median waiting times for admitted treatment increased 30 percent from 7.6 weeks
                            in 2008 to 10.1 weeks in 2019, for example.211 In Sweden, the waits for treatment grew so
                            long that the country in 2005 introduced a law guaranteeing a maximum waiting time for
                            treatment of 90 days. However, in 2017, more than 20 percent of patients still had to wait
                            more than 90 days.212 Sweden is also witnessing among the fastest growth rates in private
                            health insurance coverage; an estimated 6 percent of the population now has private health
                            insurance.213 Spending on voluntary healthcare programs rose from 1.1 percent of GDP in
                            2000 to 1.8 percent in 2017.




                            207
                                  Adam Corlett and Lindsay Judge, Home affront: Housing across the generations, Resolution Foundation, September
                                  2017; Office of National Statistics Expenditure survey 1961–1983; Labor Force Survey 1984–2017.
                            208
                                  For further details, see Fiscal sustainability of health systems: Bridging health and finance perspectives, OECD, 2015;
                                  Irene Papanicolas, Liana R. Woskie, and Ashish K. Jha, “Health care spending in the United States and other high-income
                                  countries,” JAMA, March 2018, Volume 319, Number 10.
                            209
                                  Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of Truven MarketScan data, 2016.
                            210
                                  Global Burden of Disease Collaborative Network, 2016; OECD Health statistics, 2019.
                            211
                                  Referral to treatment (RTT) waiting times statistics for consultant-led elective care, NHS England, 2018/19 and 2007/08
                                  annual reports.
                            212
                                  Government of Sweden, Sweden.se.
                            213
                                  Anna H. Glenngard, The Swedish Health Care System, The Commonwealth Fund, 2019.



74                          McKinsey Global Institute


    Average spending on voluntary healthcare programs increased by 0.2 percentage point of
    GDP, but this masks large differences between countries. The United States, which saw the
    introduction of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, had the largest drop in spending, which fell by
    more than half from 7.0 percent of GDP in 2000 to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2017.214 South Korea
    saw the largest increase, 1.3 percentage points, from 1.8 percent in 2000 to 3.2 percent
    in 2017.

    Finally, education. Education prices have jumped in all countries except Japan; they nearly
    doubled relative to general consumer prices in the United Kingdom due to increases in
    university fees that started in 2010. Education prices increased by more than 70 percentage
    points in Australia, Denmark, Ireland, and the United States. However, given the low share
    of education in household consumption, 2 percent on average (reflecting a range of 0 to
    4 percent), the absolute effect is limited.

    Government institutions in this field are also playing a smaller role. Government spending
    on education as a whole remained flat at 4.5 percent of GDP from 2000 to 2015, on average
    for our 22 countries, but private spending on education rose. The share of public funding in
    education fell in 18 out of the 21 countries for which data are available, by an average of six
    percentage points between 2000 and 2015, while the private share rose by six percentage
    points.215 New Zealand saw the largest increase in public funding share, while the United
    Kingdom saw the largest increase in private funding share.

    In some instances, decreased institutional involvement resulted from active policy decisions.
    For instance, the United Kingdom increased maximum university tuition fees from £3,000 to
    £9,000 in 2010 and allowed the cap to rise with inflation in 2017.216 Other countries have faced
    public budget constraints that froze education spending, with private and household sources
    increasing spending to make up some of the difference. For example, Spain passed measures
    to control public education spending in 2012 in response to the economic crisis and the
    pursuit of European Union fiscal targets, and it has seen one of the largest growths in share of
    private funding, at ten percentage points from 2010 to 2015.217




Access to education
has improved.
                                            Tertiary education attainment rates rose
                                            to 42 percent in 2017 from 28 percent in
                                            2000 on average in the 22 countries.


    214
          For further details on the US healthcare market, see Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Atul Gupta, “Is American pet health
          care (also) uniquely inefficient?,” American Economic Review, May 2017, Volume 107, Number 5.
    215
          OECD Education database, 2019.
    216
          The increase in tuition fees in the United Kingdom varies across the constituent countries. For example, Scottish
          students can attend university free in Scotland but pay fees in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Most students pay
          for university through student loans, which they are required to start repaying only if they earn £25,000 per year. After 30
          years, the debt is forgiven. An estimated 83 percent of students will not repay their loan in full within 30 years, according
          to the Institute for Fiscal Studies. See Chris Belfield, Jack Britton, and Laura van der Erve, Higher education finance
          reform: Raising the repayment threshold to £25,000 and freezing the cap at £9,250, Institute for Fiscal Studies, October
          2017, and Heidi Blake, “Grants, loans and tuition fees: A timeline of how university funding has evolved,” Telegraph,
          November 10, 2010.
    217
          OECD Education database, 2019.




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         75


     While education prices do not heavily affect the average consumer—education accounts
     for 2 percent of household expenditure on average—they disproportionately affect certain
     households, such as families with multiple children in college.

     Access to education has improved; tertiary attainment rates for the population aged 25 to
     64 increased from 28 percent in 2000 to 42 percent in 2017, on average in our 22 countries,
     equivalent to more than 155 million people.218 The rate varies from Canada at 57 percent
     to Italy at 19 percent in 2017; the change was greatest in Ireland and South Korea at
     24 percentage points. PISA scores for reading, mathematics, and science declined by
     2 percent on average between 2000 and 2018, however. Access to knowledge has been
     democratized with innovations such as Wikipedia, massive open online courses by top
     universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and sites such as Khan
     Academy providing free education courses. Education, training, and reskilling will become
     even more critical as the future of work changes the demand for various jobs significantly.



     Reaping the fruits of your labor and being able to afford a comfortable life commensurate
     with your aspirations is an essential component of the social contract. Technology and
     globalization have helped push down costs for many discretionary goods and services and
     have improved the convenience of shopping. Yet three basics of everyday life—housing,
     healthcare, and education—have become much more expensive over the past two decades
     and are consuming a larger proportion of household budgets, especially for lower-income
     families. While increasingly deregulated markets for discretionary goods and markets seem
     to have benefited consumers on the whole, the institutional response in markets for basics,
     especially housing, has not reduced the rising burden and may even have increased the
     responsibility of many individuals in OECD economies for their own economic outcomes.




     218
           Ibid.




76   McKinsey Global Institute




© Getty images


4   Individuals
    as savers
    The third arena we examined in relation to our focus on the evolving social contract is the
    role of individuals as savers. Saving is closely connected to the other two arenas covered in
    the chapters on individuals as workers and as consumers, since it represents what is left of
    income after consumption.

    Saving is both individual, or at a household level, and institutional. The return on savings is
    the main determinant of wealth growth, along with the saving rate, and for our analysis we
    measure both. In this chapter, we look at individual expectations and outcomes for savers
    at a time of demographic shifts, which are especially affecting saving for retirement, and of
    relatively low overall returns.

    Our key findings are that institutional savings on behalf of individuals have declined in 16 of
    the 22 sample countries. This is happening in particular with the shift from defined-benefit
    pensions to defined-contribution pensions and other changes in public-sector pension plans
    in many countries to make them sustainable. Pressure on pensions has grown. This is partly
    because people are living longer, itself a hallmark of progress, which means that they spend
    more years in retirement. The pressure also has grown because the ratio of working-age
    population to the population aged 65 and up has been increasing due to lower birth rates
    compared with the baby boomer generation.

    In our 22 sample countries, expected years of retirement increased from 16 years in 1980 to
    20 years in 2018.219 However, net replacement rates from mandatory pensions—that is, the
    percentage of an individual’s annual employment income that is replaced by retirement
    income—have been declining in most countries due to changes in public and corporate
    pension entitlements. This puts the onus on households to build wealth for retirement.
    However, many households are saving little or not at all. And while technology is creating
    new opportunities for savers to improve yields, returns on investment for most households
    are down.

    Saving is thus a highly challenging arena for the social contract. Many individuals are not yet
    meeting—or are unable to meet—the challenge of taking greater responsibility for their own
    retirement savings, even as institutional saving on their behalf is declining.


    Aging societies pose a growing challenge for institutional saving
    People are living longer and birthrates have declined in many of the 22 advanced economies
    we examine, as a result of scientific and technological progress. While longevity is a sign
    of progress, the combination with declining birthrates has a substantial effect on the age
    structure of OECD countries—and, consequently, on pensions and the savings required
    for retirement.

    Life expectancy at age 65 in the OECD, which was 14.1 years in 1970, is expected to rise
    to 22.6 years by 2050. In 2000, there were 23 individuals aged 65 and over for every
    100 persons of working age (ages 15 to 64) on average in all OECD countries. The ratio is
    projected to reach 35 by 2025, and 53 by 2050.220 Low birth rates also mean that the working-
    age population in some countries has declined.


    219
          Expected number of years in retirement, OECD Employment database, 2019.
    220
          Pensions at a glance, OECD, 2017.




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                           79


                           These demographic trends pose a considerable challenge for institutional as well as individual
                           savers. Institutional pension systems will need to deal with higher pension payouts and lower
                           receipts. Individual savers will need to save more for themselves, to compensate for the
                           shortfall in institutional saving. However, the low-growth, low-interest-rate environment that
                           characterized most of the decade after the 2008 financial crisis has made it difficult for both
                           individuals and institutional savers to earn the returns necessary to ensure a steady, adequate
                           stream of pension payments in retirement.221

                           Changing demographics are affecting the fiscal sustainability of governments and other
                           pension providers
                           Demographic shifts have had a major impact on the fiscal sustainability of governments and
                           other institutions that provide pensions. General government gross financial liabilities, which
                           were about 40 percent of GDP in 1970, rose to 69 percent in 2000 and 110 percent in 2018.222

                           At the highest level, institutions have two options: increase pension contributions or decrease
                           pension liabilities. Many countries have increased contributions at the margins. For example,
                           Canada announced in 2016 that the contribution rates for employers and employees will
                           gradually increase from 4.95 percent to 5.95 percent between 2019 and 2023223 . However,
                           few countries are using increased pension contributions to plug the funding gap.

                           By contrast, decreasing future pension liabilities has been the most common way to increase
                           pension sustainability. The mechanism by which pension liabilities have fallen varies by
                           country, but the most common are increases in the statutory retirement age, changes in
                           indexation rules, and adjusting pension benefits for new retirees.




>1/2
                           More than half of OECD countries have raised the statutory retirement age, and some,
                           including Denmark, Finland, Italy, and Sweden, now explicitly link the retirement age to life
                           expectancy.224 By 2060 the normal retirement age will approach 66, which represents an
                           increase of 1.5 years for men and 2.1 years for women since 2015.225 Life expectancy has been
Share of OECD countries    increasing at a faster rate, however, which means that the proportion of an average life spent
that have raised their     in retirement continues to rise.
statutory retirement age
                           Some countries froze benefit indexation as a temporary measure following the 2008 crisis,
                           and many are now moving to make less generous indexation options, such as indexing to
                           prices (as opposed to indexing to wage growth, for example), permanent. Some countries,
                           such as Finland, have chosen to put an explicit limit on index-related increases, while
                           others, such as Canada, directly link benefit indexation and the financial standing of the
                           pension system.226

                           Few countries adjust the level of pension benefits provided to retirees over the course of their
                           retirement. However, Australia tightened the targeting of its Age Pension asset test starting
                           in 2017, and Spain has begun adjusting the initial benefit paid to new retirees, based on life
                           expectancy gains, every five years beginning in 2019.227




                           221
                                 Economists have debated the cause of the low-growth, low-interest-rate environment after the financial crisis. Larry
                                 Summers advanced the theory of “secular stagnation,” coined by American economist Alvin Hansen in the 1930s.
                                 Hansen argued that demographic factors were driving fundamentally slower economic growth. Summers updated the
                                 theory after the financial crisis to explain the slow post-crisis recovery in advanced economies. Economists such as Ben
                                 Bernanke dispute Summers’s theory, contending that a global savings glut is the driving force behind the slow recovery.
                                 See Duncan Weldon, “Why ‘secular stagnation’ matters,” BBC News, April 2, 2015; Lawrence H. Summers, “The age of
                                 secular stagnation: What it is and what to do about it,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2016; Ben S. Bernanke, Why interest
                                 rates are so low, part 3: The global savings glut, Brookings Institution, April 1, 2015.
                           222
                                 Average for 1970 includes nine countries only. OECD Economic Outlook, number 105, OECD, 2019.
                           223
                                 Canada Pension Plan enhancement, Government of Canada, 2019.
                           224
                                 In Italy, linking retirement ages to life expectancy has been suspended until 2026 for certain occupations. Pensions at a
                                 glance, OECD, 2017.
                           225
                                 Pensions at a glance, OECD, 2017.
                           226
                                 Ibid.
                           227
                                 Ibid.




80                         McKinsey Global Institute


Pension system sustainability remains a concern despite recent reforms. The World Economic
Forum estimates that the retirement savings gap for government pensions was $40 trillion in
five countries (Australia, Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States) in 2015,
and that without further reforms the shortfall could increase at 4 percent per year, reaching
$175 trillion by 2050.228 The United States makes up almost 60 percent of this total, with
unfunded liabilities estimated to rise 5 percent per year.229

As a result, the net pension replacement rate that an average worker can expect from their
mandatory pensions has decreased by 11 percentage points in our 22-country sample
(Exhibit 18).230 Canada, Greece, and the United Kingdom saw their net replacement rates fall
by more than 40 percentage points, while Italy, Belgium, and New Zealand registered small
increases. Denmark and Portugal saw double-digit increases. Net replacement rates now
range from 92 percent in Italy to just 28 percent in the United Kingdom, which generates a
net pension wealth equivalent to a British worker’s receiving their salary equivalent in pension
for the first six years of retirement and then no assistance for the remaining 15 years of their
expected lifespan.231 Net replacement rates may fall even further. This means that individuals
need to increase individual savings.

Alternative forms of work, including self-employment, temporary employment, and part-time
employment, carry additional pension-related concerns for workers. According to research by
the OECD, these workers typically have less coverage from existing pension systems, which
were largely developed to serve full-time workers in continuous employment. In addition,
workers in alternative arrangements often earn less than standard workers, face higher risks
of unemployment, and may have interrupted pension contributions. Collectively, these factors
may contribute to low pensions and a higher likelihood of relative poverty in old age, which is
an area of concern because alternative workers represent a large and growing share of the
employed population.232

Many pension systems are shifting from defined-benefit to defined-contribution plans
The proportion of pension assets under management that are defined contribution, for which
market risk is borne by the individual, rather than defined benefit, for which institutions bear
the market risk, increased between 2007 and 2018.233 In 16 countries, the average increase
was two percentage points. On a weighted-average basis, the increase was six percentage
points, primarily due to the size of pension assets under management in the United States.234

Countries that faced the largest decreases in defined-benefit assets include Italy, with
a decline of 13 percentage points, and the United States, with 11 percentage points. This
shift away from defined-benefit pensions is part of a longer-term trend.235 Sweden, the
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom were the only countries to increase their share of
defined-benefit plans by two to four percentage points. Five countries have only defined-
benefit pension assets under management: Austria, Germany, Finland, South Korea, and
Switzerland. Spain has only defined-contribution pension assets under management.




228
      Investing in (and for) our future, World Economic Forum, 2019.
229
      Another estimate for 21 countries (representing 90 percent of GDP and 60 percent of population) puts the pension gap at
      $15.8 trillion by 2050. See Fixing the pensions crisis: Ensuring lifetime financial security, Group of 30, November 2019.
230
      Due to data availability, we have focused on the net pension replacement rate for an average male worker. Based on data
      for 2010 to 2018, the net pension replacement rates for male and female workers are the same in almost all countries
      except Australia (where the gap in net pension replacement rates grew between 2010 and 2018) and Switzerland (where
      a gap emerged in 2018). Austria closed the net pension replacement rate gap for male and female workers between 2004
      and 2018. We have focused on mandatory pensions in OECD countries due to limited comparable data on private pension
      wealth in the 22 OECD countries in our sample.
231
      OECD Pensions Statistics database, 2017.
232
      Pensions at a glance, OECD, 2019.
233
      Defined-benefit pensions are pensions that provide a specific financial amount in retirement, typically based on an
      employee’s salary and the length of time they worked for their employer. Defined-contribution pensions are pension
      schemes that depend on the amount of money paid into the scheme by an employee or employer. Jacob S. Hacker, The
      Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the Decline of the American Dream, second edition, New York, NY:
      Oxford University Press, 2019; Types of private pensions, GOV.UK, December 2019.
234
      McKinsey & Company, Performance Lens database.
235
      Pensions at a glance, OECD, 2009.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     81


Exhibit 18

Net replacement rates from mandatory pensions have declined in 16 out of 22 countries by
an average of 11 percentage points, and net pension wealth covers just ten years on average.

                                 Net replacement rate from mandatory pensions1

                                 Change, 2004–18                                   2004,      2018,        Net pension wealth, 20182                         Expected years in
                                 Percentage points                                  %           %          Years                                             retirement, 20183

     Greece                      -49                                               100          51                                   11                              24

     Canada                         -44                                             95          51                                  10                               21

     United Kingdom                  -42                                            70          28                      6                                            21

     Switzerland                              -24                                   68          44                              9                                    21

     Japan                                     -22                                  59          37                          8                                        18

     Germany                                    -20                                 72          52                                   11                              21

     Sweden                                        -15                              68          53                                  10                               20

     Finland                                       -15                              79          64                                       12                          21

     Norway                                         -14                             65          52                                  10                               20

     Australia                                       -11                            52          41                          7                                        22

     Spain                                                  -5                      88          83                                            14                     24

     Netherlands                                            -4                      84          80                                             15                    21

     Austria                                                -3                      93          90                                                      17           22

     United States                                           -2                     51          49                              9                                    18

     South Korea                                             -1                     44          43                              9                                    15

     Ireland                                                 -1                     37          36                          7                                        20

     Italy                                                         3                89          92                                                 15                23

     Belgium                                                        3               63          66                                        12                         23

     New Zealand                                                    3               40          43                                  10                               18

     France                                                          5              69          74                                             14                    25

     Portugal                                                            10         80          90                                             15                    19

     Denmark                                                                  17    54          71                                  10                               20

     Weighted average                                 -11                           65          54                                  10                               20




1    Net replacement rate for mandatory pensions for male workers; data missing for female workers prior to 2010. Net pension replacement rate is identical for men and
     women in Australia (2010–18), Switzerland (2018), and Austria (2004).
2    Net pension wealth is present value of flow of pension benefits, taking account of taxes and social security contributions that retirees have to pay on their pensions. It is
     affected by life expectancy and by age at which people take their pensions, as well by as indexation rules. This indicator is measured as a simple average of multiple of
     annual net earnings for men and women. Assumes individuals consume their average net earnings each year in retirement.
3    Expected years in retirement for both men and women taken as a simple average of male and female expected years in retirement.
Source: OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




82                                             McKinsey Global Institute


                 Individual savings are falling, and some households are not saving at all
                 A decline in institutional savings implies increased individual responsibility to save. Yet
                 household saving rates have fallen in our 22 sample countries on average, with considerable
                 variations by country (Exhibit 19).

                 In all of our sample countries, the household saving rate has fallen by 1.4 percentage points
                 since 2000.236 Denmark, Ireland, and Sweden have seen an increase of more than ten
                 percentage points, while Japan, Spain, the United Kingdom, and others have seen decreases
                 of more than six percentage points.

                 Data on saving rates by wealth group is sparse, but data for France and the United States
                 indicates that lower wealth groups (at least the bottom 50 percent of the wealth distribution)
                 have struggled to enter the realm of positive savings since 2000.

                 Across a broad range of our sample countries, surveys show that more than half of individuals
                 did not save for old age in 2017, and a quarter did not save any money at all (Exhibit 20).237
                 Residents of countries with traditionally generous social welfare systems tend to save less. In
                 France, Italy, and Spain, for example, over two-thirds of adults did not save for old age in 2017.

                 Reasons for low saving rates vary by country and by socioeconomic group. In addition to
                 differing levels of guaranteed pensions, factors including low ability to save, low rates of
                 access to appropriate saving vehicles, and low levels of financial literacy all play a role. In the
                 United States, for example, many people miss out on opportunities to save for retirement
                 (see Box 3, “Low levels of participation and saving in pension retirement plans in the
                 United States”).


More than half of individuals did not save for old age in 2017.
One-quarter did not save at all.
                 While households have new opportunities to invest, returns have been
                 low for many
                 Technology is providing new opportunities to save and earn higher returns. However, many
                 households, especially those at the bottom end of the income distribution, are seeing low
                 returns on investment.

                 Technology has opened new opportunities for savers
                 Technology is transforming the way individuals invest in the capital market. The internet has
                 made saving, tracking, and investing wealth easier. Digital banking, digital savings platforms,
                 and new products such as robo-advisers mean that comparatively low-risk, high-return
                 investments are increasingly available with more accessible deposit thresholds. However,
                 individuals’ capacity to take advantage of these new financial products depends on their level
                 of financial literacy, especially as new products become increasingly complex. Lower levels of
                 financial literacy are more prevalent among those with less than a college education and lower
                 levels of financial wealth, and among women, which affects financial decision making and
                 long-term returns.238

                 Behavioral economics is also playing a role. For example, well-timed “nudges” have the
                 potential to alter saving behavior; a carefully framed email encouraging enrollment in
                 a saving program that was sent to nearly 800,000 military service members almost
                 doubled the program enrollment rate. Even better results may be possible with more
                 personalized interventions.239



                 236
                       National accounts at a glance, OECD, 2019.
                 237
                       Global financial inclusion database, World Bank, 2017.
                 238
                       Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell, The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory and evidence, National
                       Bureau of Economic Research working paper number 18952, April 2013.
                 239
                       Shlomo Benartzi et al., “Should governments invest more in nudging?,” Psychological Science, August 2017, Volume 28,
                       Issue 8.




                 The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    83


Exhibit 19

Household saving rates fell in 11 out of 22 countries by 1.4 percentage points on average,
which appears to be driven primarily by low saving rates among lower wealth groups.

                          Net household saving rate as a share of
                          disposable income1
                          Change, 2000–18                              2000, 2018,
                          Percentage points                             %     %                                                                 Change

    Greece                 -15.5                                        -1     -17
                                                                                            Net individual saving rate by wealth
    Portugal                     -7.6                                    3      -4          class in France, percent

    Spain                          -6.6                                 6       -1          40

    United Kingdom                 -6.6                                 6       -1
                                                                                            30
    Belgium                        -6.4                                 10       4

    Japan                          -6.1                                 9        3                                                        Top     +1.1 pp
                                                                                            20                                            10%
    Italy                           -5.1                                 7       2

                                                                                            10
    Finland                          -4.0                                3      -1
                                                                                                                                          Middle -0.7 pp
    Austria                          -3.8                               11       7                                                        40%
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                          Bottom -0.9 pp
    Canada                           -3.5                                5       2                                                        50%

    France                                 -0.2                         9        8         -10
                                                                                             2000 02           04         06   08   10 2012
    South Korea                                   0.5                    7       7
                                                                                            Net household saving rate by wealth
    Germany                                       0.9                   9       10          class in the United States2, percent

    New Zealand                                    1.1                  -3      -1          30
                                                                                                                                          Top   +15.3 pp
    Australia                                      1.5                   2       4                                                        10%

    United States                                  1.9                   5       7          20

    Norway                                         2.4                   4       7

    Netherlands                                          4.8             4       9          10

    Switzerland                                          4.8            14      19

    Ireland                                                    10.5     -4       7            0                                           Bottom +2.3 pp
                                                                                                                                          90%
    Sweden                                                     10.7      4      15

    Denmark                                                     11.9    -6       6         -10
                                                                                             2000 02           04         06   08   10 2012
    Weighted
                                          -1.4                          6        5
    average

1     Data for 2017 where 2018 value is missing; South Korea data from 2005–14.
2     Three-year smoothed saving rates using Appendix table B33, Saez and Zucman (2014).
Source: OECD; Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret, and Piketty (2016); Saez and Zucman (2014); McKinsey Global Institute analysis




84                                           McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 20

Over half of individuals did not save for old age, and a quarter did not save any money.


                             Did not save for old age                                              Did not save any money
                             Percent of population aged 15+ years, 2017                            Percent of population aged 15+ years, 2017

 Greece                                                                                       92                                         79

 Spain                                                                             74                                     32

 Italy                                                                        69                                               38

 France                                                                       68                                               37

 Portugal                                                                     68                                                    45

 Finland                                                                 61                                            28

 Ireland                                                                 60                                            28

 South Korea                                                         58                                                   31

 United Kingdom                                                      57                                              26

 Netherlands                                                         57                                           21

 Denmark                                                        50                                             20

 Australia                                                      50                                              21

 Japan                                                          49                                                22

 Belgium                                                       48                                                        30

 United States                                                 46                                               21

 Germany                                                     45                                                     24

 Austria                                                   43                                                  20

 Sweden                                                    43                                                17

 Canada                                                   41                                                   20

 New Zealand                                             40                                               14

 Switzerland                                            39                                                     18

 Norway                                                 39                                              10

 Weighted average                                                   53                                               26


Source: World Bank Financial Inclusion Indicators; OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                              85


         Box 3
         Low levels of participation and saving in pension retirement plans
         in the United States

         The US public pension system, Social Security, is designed to provide a minimum
         retirement income to all citizens; individuals are expected to smooth their income
         independently so that they can sustain living standards though retirement. This can
         be done via personal savings that supplement income from the government. For many
         Americans, a 401(k) retirement savings account is the primary means of saving for
         retirement, due in part to tax incentives.

         However, access to retirement accounts such as the 401(k) generally comes through
         large employers, and it is estimated that only about 51 percent of Americans can
         pay into defined-contribution plans of this sort.1 This means that almost half the
         population is missing out on the higher returns and tax incentives that typically
         come with accounts of this type. Moreover, tax incentives mostly benefit upper-
         income households.2

         In addition, among those who do qualify, only 74 percent are enrolled in a defined-
         contribution retirement plan, according to the investment management group
         Vanguard. 3 Enrollment is particularly low for those with low net worth. Enrollment
         rates for those with a net worth less than $15,000 and of $15,000 to $30,000 are
         just 31 percent and 51 percent, respectively. Among young people, only 43 percent
         of eligible individuals under the age of 25 are enrolled in retirement plans.

         Even among the Americans enrolled in defined-contribution retirement plans, there
         are doubts about the adequacy of retirement savings. Less than 2 percent of those
         earning less than $75,000 annually are contributing the maximum to their pensions,
         and average balances are modest for many. Vanguard reports that the mean balance
         in its accounts in 2018 was $92,148, but the median was just $22,217.

         Even among savers aged 65 and up, median wealth is just $58,035. Assuming annuity
         rates from a pension pot for a 65-year-old are generally about 5 percent, the median
         retiree would likely receive only about $3,000 per year. 4 The Employee Benefit
         Research Institute estimates that 40.6 percent of all US households with a head of
         household aged between 35 and 64 is likely to run short of money in retirement.5




         1
             “51 percent of private industry workers had access to only defined contribution retirement plans,” Economics
             Daily, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, October 2, 2018.
         2
             In the United States, the primary individual savings vehicles are the 401(k) for private-sector employees, 403(b)
             for public-sector employees, and individual retirement accounts for all individuals. Tax incentives to use these
             vehicles implies the lost revenue may be considered a significant government expense. Similarly, 529 accounts
             promote saving for college, and health savings accounts encourage saving for healthcare. These tax incentives
             are not captured in our analysis of government spending and market intervention in chapter 5.
         3
             How America saves 2019: The retirement savings behavior of 5 million participants, Vanguard, June 2019.
         4
             Bob Pisani, “America’s retirement accounts are growing, but not fast enough,” CNBC, June 12, 2019.
         5
             Retirement savings shortfalls: Evidence from EBRI’s 2019 Retirement Security Projection Model, Employee
             Benefit Research Institute, 2019.




86   McKinsey Global Institute


Digital apps that offer “little and often” automatic saving opportunities can make a difference,
too; 30 percent of users of the investment app Acorns who were asked if they would like to
save $5 every day opted in, compared with just 7 percent of those who were asked if they
wanted to save the monthly equivalent of $150.240

Big data are now able to assess whether people make financial decisions using their instincts
or based on careful reflection—and can adjust the level of digital nudging based on their
decision-making style. Assessment tools are being developed that map personality traits
such as loss aversion and present bias to create personalized financial recommendations.241

Institutional changes have also had an effect, especially deposit protection, which has
increased substantially in the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 18 out of 22 countries.
In our sample, guaranteed deposits have increased from 0.9 to 1.9 percent of mean wealth
on average.242

Returns on investment are lower for many low-wealth households
Rates of return have varied considerably by country and by region. At the national
level, Greece, Italy, and Spain experienced negative total real returns on the stock
market from 2000 to 2018, while Denmark and Norway saw a real rate of return of over
5 percent annually.243

Rates of return have been historically high over the past few decades. Average annual rates
of return on equities were 5.7 percent from 1965 to 2014, compared with 7.9 percent between
1985 and 2014, in Western Europe and the United States.244 However, current returns are
lower than 20-year averages for US stocks (S&P 500) and 10-year treasury bonds, 10-year
German bonds, and high-yield and emerging market debt.245

For lower wealth groups, low saving rates have been exacerbated by low rates of return
on assets. The bottom wealth decile in France earned a return on assets and portfolios of
negative 0.2 percent between 1970 and 2014, compared with positive 6.4 percent for the top
wealth decile. Similarly, the bottom five deciles in the United States earned returns of between
negative 1.9 and positive 0.8 percent, compared with positive returns of 2.0 to 6.0 percent for
the top five deciles (Exhibit 21).

The difference lies in the makeup of the asset portfolios; the less affluent need to keep a
significant portion of their wealth in low-return or liquid assets such as deposits and may
also face barriers to accessing high-return assets such as equities. One barrier is that there
has been a decline in net equity issuances over the past 20 years, meaning that individuals
have less access to high-return equity investments.246 In countries such as the United States,
ownership of equities is increasingly concentrated among the wealthy: the top decile has
87 percent of public equity ownership in the United States.247 Meanwhile, low returns for
less affluent savers have been particularly severe in the post-crisis period, when monetary
policies such as quantitative easing have pushed the real rate of return on deposits close to or
below zero.

One asset that has bucked the trend is housing. House prices have increased fastest in large
urban areas; the average real rate of return in the most important urban centers in our sample


240
      Adam Shell, “Acorns savings app: Why saving $5 a day is easier than committing to $150 a month,” USA Today, September
      20, 2018.
241
      Shlomo Benartzi et al., “Should governments invest more in nudging?,” Psychological Science, August 2017, Volume 28,
      Issue 8.
242
      Data from central banks and other government sources.
243
      Monthly monetary and financial statistics, OECD, 2019.
244
      Diminishing returns: Why investors may need to lower their expectations, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2016.
245
      Josephine Cumbo and Robin Wigglesworth, “ ‘Their house is on fire’: The pension crisis sweeping the world,” Financial
      Times, November 17, 2019.
246
      Superstars: The dynamics of firms, sectors, and cities leading the global economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October
      2018.
247
      Public equity ownership by household income percentile, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                 87


                                countries has been 3.3 percent annually. House prices in Paris, London, Stockholm, and
                                Vancouver have increased by at least 5 percent annually, representing a total return of over
                                140 percent since 2000.248 However, a significant share of the population experiences these
                                increases as increasing housing costs rather than as increasing wealth.




170M
                                While mean wealth has recovered, the real wealth of median individuals is still
                                23 percent below pre-crisis levels, and household debt is rising in many countries
                                This combination of low saving rates and low rates of return means that personal wealth
Number of individuals for       growth has been low or even negative since 2000 for about 170 million people (or 21 percent
whom personal wealth            of the population over age 15) in our 22 sample countries.249 As shown in Exhibit 22, real
growth has been low or          median net wealth has not recovered in 13 countries since the financial crisis; it declined from
negative since 2000, about      $104,371 to $80,659 in our 22 countries between 2007 and 2018 and has only just started
21% of population over 15       to rise again.250 In fact, the 2013–18 compound annual growth rate for median wealth was
                                negative 0.6 percent, and it declined in 10 out of 22 countries, including Norway (negative
                                11.9), Italy (negative 3.8 percent), Japan (negative 2.4 percent), and the United Kingdom
                                (negative 2.3 percent).

                                Growth in real mean net wealth has also been sluggish since the crisis: annual inflation-
                                adjusted growth has been less than 1 percent for most of the post-crisis period. In the
                                22 countries in our sample, between 2015 and 2017, the real growth rate for mean net wealth
                                was just 1 percent per year; it was negative in seven countries: Belgium, Canada, Finland,
                                Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, and the United Kingdom.



16%
Share of individuals who do
                                Wealth growth has been particularly low at the bottom of the wealth pyramid, and the
                                proportion of individuals with zero or negative net worth has risen significantly in recent
                                decades. In the United States, for example, 23 percent of households had zero or negative net
                                worth in 2017 compared with just 16 percent in 2001.251 In our 22 sample countries, 16 percent
not have sufficient wealth to   of individuals have insufficient wealth to cover three months of basic living expenses, and
cover three months of basic     20 percent do not have enough for six months (Exhibit 23).252 Low net worth appears to be
living expenses                 most problematic in Denmark and the Netherlands, where 39 and 43 percent of individuals,
                                respectively, have a net worth of less than 50 percent of the national relative poverty line.

                                In some countries, debt has also become a more significant issue. Time-series data on debt is
                                difficult to find at an aggregate level, but high and growing levels of household debt continue
                                to provoke concern in many countries. Many households deleveraged in Ireland, Portugal,
                                Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States between 2007 and 2017, for example.
                                However, household debt continued to grow in other OECD economies, such as Australia
                                (up 14 percentage points), Canada (22), Norway (28), and South Korea (23).253 In our 22 sample
                                countries, 13 percent of households had a debt-to-asset ratio over 75 percent in 2014, ranging
                                from 3 percent in Italy to 33 percent in Denmark and the Netherlands.254

                                Data from the United States also indicates that debt levels have increased for the indebted;
                                panel data reveals that the real net wealth of the bottom decile of households fell from
                                approximately negative $23,240 to negative $69,408 between 1999 and 2017. These
                                extremely indebted households differ in a number of ways from households in the next
                                decile. The heads of heavily indebted households tend to be younger (38 versus 41), better
                                educated (16 versus 14 years of education), and to have higher incomes ($59,000 versus
                                $34,000 per year).


                                248
                                      “Global cities house-price index,” Economist, March 2019.
                                249
                                      Assumes that 47 percent of the population over 15 years saved for old age, on average in 22 countries, based on World
                                      Bank Financial Inclusion indicators data. Of these, 50 percent have low or negative wealth growth in countries in which
                                      median wealth growth has been less than 1 percent since 2000, and 20 percent in countries with median wealth growth
                                      greater than 1 percent; calculated using wealth data from Credit Suisse, Global Wealth Databook 2018.
                                250
                                      All wealth data are taken from Credit Suisse nominal wealth data (Global Wealth Databook 2018) deflated using the
                                      OECD CPI deflator.
                                251
                                      Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use data set. Produced and distributed by the Survey Research Center, Institute
                                      for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 2019.
                                252
                                      Wealth database, OECD, 2019.
                                253
                                      How secure is the global financial system a decade after the crisis?, McKinsey Global Institute, September 2018.
                                254
                                      Household debt, OECD, 2019.



88                              McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 21

Lower wealth groups have lower rates of return on their assets.


Asset composition by wealth group 1                                                                Deposits                      Business assets               Vehicles2
Percent                                                                                            Financial assets              Housing
                                                                                                   (excl deposits)
                    Decile
                    Bottom             D2              D3             D4              D5             D6              D7             D8              D9             Top
France,
2014




Average
total rate             -0.2            0.2             1.2            3.7             5.3            5.5             5.6            5.6             5.8            6.44
of return3

United
States,
2017




Average
total rate             0.8            -0.8            -0.5            -1.9           0.2             2.0             2.7            3.8             5.0            6.0
of return3




1   Estimates for France are conducted with government macro data while US asset estimates are self-reported survey data. Housing includes homes and other real
    estate. Financial assets includes stocks, annuities, and other assets. Methodology for France followed to estimate US values, and outliers have been excluded.
2   Vehicles are included for US because they represent a major share of wealth in PSID data, and are included in net wealth calculations. Data for vehicles in France
    missing.
3   Calculated for both countries using average annual rates of return by asset categories in France, 1970–2014; total returns are sum of flow returns and of real rates of
    capital gains from national accounts. They are gross of all taxes but net of capital depreciation. State pensions not included.
4   For France, the average total returns for top decile are proxied by average total return for the 95th percentile.
Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use data set. Produced and distributed by the Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2019;
        Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret, and Piketty (2016); McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                          89


Exhibit 22

Mean individual wealth has returned to pre-crisis levels but median wealth has not,
and growth rates of both are fairly flat.

                                                                                                                                        Number of countries
                                                                                                                                         with higher/lower
22-country weighted average (real $, thousand) and                                                                                         wealth levels
smoothed 3-year average growth rates (percent)                                                                                                2018 vs 2007


                           Average level                                                3-year average growth rates1



                                                                                                                                                          11
             300                                             287                                                           293
Mean                                                                                                                                    +2%
individual
wealth

                                                                                                                                                          11
              250                                                                                                                  8%


                     200
             200
                                                                                                                                   4%


              150
                                                                                                                                   0%

              100

                                                                                                                                   -4%
               50



                 0                                                                                                                 -8%
                     2000                         05          07               10                          15             2018



                                                                                                                                                           9
             300
Median
individual
wealth

                                                                                                                                                         13
              250                                                                                                                  8%



             200
                                                                                                                                   4%


              150
                                                                                                                                   0%
                                                             104
              100
                                                                                                                             81         -23%
                      66
                                                                                                                                   -4%
               50



                 0                                                                                                                 -8%
                     2000                         05          07               10                          15             2018

1 An average of year-on-year growth rate for 3 years around the named year (e.g., 2004 figure is average of year-on-year growth rates for 2003, 2004, and 2005).
Note: Includes private pensions but not public pensions.
Source: Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; McKinsey Global Institute Analysis




90                                        McKinsey Global Institute


                           In addition, the correlation between wealth and income appears to have fallen: high earnings
                           provide less of a pathway to building wealth now than in previous decades. In the United
                           States, for example, the proportion of the bottom wealth decile that is also in the bottom
                           income quintile fell from 28 percent to 18 percent between 1999 and 2017. The 2017 bottom
                           wealth decile was fairly evenly split across the income quintiles. This is seen in several
                           economies; in Australia, Japan, and Spain, less than a third of those in the bottom wealth
                           quintile are in the bottom income quintile.255

                           Young people in particular appear to be experiencing difficulties in building wealth. In France,
                           the average 30-year-old had 61 percent of average adult wealth in 1970 compared with just
                           32 percent in 2010.256 In the United States, the equivalent figures for the average 30- to
                           34-year-old were 69 percent in 1984 compared with 31 percent in 2017.257 In fact, in both
                           France and the United States, the wealth-age profile has shifted substantially since the 1970s
                           and 1980s, with successive generations building wealth later and later. Low levels of wealth
                           among young people are also a concern in the United Kingdom, where just 53 percent of 22-
                           to 29-year-olds have any savings, and among those who do, about 40 percent have less than
                           £1,000 in the bank.258

                           Wealth inequality has increased and old-age relative poverty has declined—but could
                           begin rising again
                           The wealth of the top 10 percent rose by 1.6 percentage points between 2010 and 2014 in
                           14 countries for which comparable data are available.259 This high wealth growth at the top
                           of the pyramid and stagnant or negative growth at the bottom have led to a considerable
                           increase in inequality; the wealth Gini coefficient has risen for 15 out of the 21 sample
                           countries with available data.260 The United States remains the country with the highest wealth
                           inequality, with a Gini coefficient of 0.81. It also has one of the highest increases in inequality
                           since 2000. Countries that were severely hit by the financial crisis, including Greece, Ireland,
                           Portugal, and Spain, have also seen inequality grow quickly. Austria, Sweden, and the United
                           Kingdom have high levels of inequality, too, but are among the six countries that have seen
                           their levels of inequality fall.

                           Old-age relative poverty has fallen in most countries since 2000, but the combination of
                           low wealth growth and lower, riskier institutional pensions could increase the proportion of
                           pensioners who struggle to make ends meet. Estimates from Canada and Ireland indicate
                           that the share of households that will have to downgrade their lifestyle on retirement is
                           between 17 and 29 percent, representing roughly 140 million to 240 million working-
                           age individuals in our sample. Without major reform, this proportion could increase to
                           50 percent.261


$104,000                   In the United States, recent estimates show that the average couple retiring today at
                           age 64 will need $280,000 just to cover healthcare and medical costs in retirement.262
                           However, 29 percent of households with a head aged 55 to 64 have no retirement savings
Median savings for US
households headed by a     or defined-benefit plan. Among those with savings, the median is just $104,000—or
person 55 to 64, for the   $310 a month in income.263
70% of such households
that have savings
                           255
                                 Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use data set. Produced and distributed by the Survey Research Center, Institute
                                 for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 2019; Inequalities in household wealth across OECD countries:
                                 Evidence from the OECD Wealth Distribution Database, OECD working paper number 88, June 2018.
                           256
                                 Bertrand Garbinti, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty, Accounting for wealth inequality dynamics: Methods,
                                 estimates and simulations for France (1800–2014), WID.world working paper series number 2016/5, World Inequality
                                 Database, 2016.
                           257
                                 Panel Study of Income Dynamics, public use data set. Produced and distributed by the Survey Research Center, Institute
                                 for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 2019.
                           258
                                 How well are you doing compared with other young people?, UK Office of National Statistics, October 2019.
                           259
                                 Wealth database, OECD, 2019.
                           260
                                 Allianz Global Wealth Report, 2018.
                           261
                                 Building on Canada’s strong retirement readiness, McKinsey & Company, 2015; Is Ireland’s population ready for
                                 retirement?, McKinsey & Company, 2015.
                           262
                                 “A couple retiring in 2018 would need an estimated $280,000 to cover health care costs in retirement,” Fidelity, April 19,
                                 2018.
                           263
                                 Most households approaching retirement have low savings, US Government Accountability Office, May 2015.




                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                      91


Exhibit 23

Twenty percent of individuals do not have enough wealth to cover six months of
basic costs.
                              Share of individuals with net wealth less than                  Share of individuals with net wealth less than
                              25% of the income poverty line                                  50% of the income poverty line
                              (3-month buffer)1                                               (6-month buffer)1
                              Percent, 2014                                                   Percent, 2014

    Netherlands                                                                      39                                                           43

    Denmark                                                                   34                                                             39

    Ireland                                                              27                                                             30

    United States                                                       25                                                              30

    Norway                                                              25                                                         27

    Germany                                                        22                                                              28

    Finland                                                   17                                                              20

    Portugal                                             14                                                             16

    Austria                                          14                                                                      19

    Greece                                           13                                                                 17

    France                                          12                                                                   17

    Belgium                                     11                                                                 14

    New Zealand                                10                                                                 14

    Italy                                      10                                                                  14

    Japan                                      10                                                             12

    Spain                                  9                                                                 10

    Canada                                 8                                                                  12

    Australia                          6                                                                 9

    United Kingdom                     6                                                                 9

    South Korea                       5                                                              7

    Weighted average                                          16                                                              20


1    Net wealth excludes pension schemes related to employment.
Source: World Bank Financial Inclusion Indicators; OECD; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




92                                         McKinsey Global Institute


Elderly bankruptcy is already rising in the United States, where one in seven people who file
for bankruptcy are now 65 years and up. This represents an almost fivefold increase over
25 years. In 1991, people over 65 made up 2 percent of bankruptcy filers; by 2016, this figure
had risen to more than 12 percent, or 133,000 individuals.

Overall debt levels in old age are also rising: in 1989, only one in five Americans aged 75 or
older were in debt; by 2016, almost half were.264 In Japan, the incidence of crime among the
elderly is soaring; 35 percent of all arrests for shoplifting involved retirees, up from 20 percent
in 2001, and the proportion of the prison population that is of retirement age has doubled over
the same period.265

At the same time, retirees in many countries are taking the initiative to compensate for low
levels of retirement income by taking on work, often part-time and alternative employment
arrangements; the so-called grey participation rate has risen substantially, from 10.5 to
14.8 percent, in our 22 countries.




Viewed from the perspective of the social contract, individuals as savers have more
opportunity to build wealth but also are having to take on considerably more risk to secure
their retirement pensions. As governments and private pension providers mostly reduce
guaranteed net replacement rates and change from defined-benefit to defined-contribution
plans, individuals’ need to ensure that they have enough wealth for their retirement has grown.
At the same time, data from our 22 sample countries suggests that many people are not
saving enough, or indeed at all, and that investment returns for most households are low.




264
      “The boomers going bust: Why elderly bankruptcy is rising in America,” Financial Times, August 2019.
265
      Crime in Japan: Economics of elderly crime, Mike Newman, February 2016.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                      93


© Getty images


5   The shifting role
    of institutions
    What has caused these changes in economic outcomes? In chapter 1, we sketched out
    the disruptive trends such as technology and globalization that have affected individuals
    in our three arenas in a range of ways. In this chapter, we look at the changing role of
    institutions themselves, in both the private and public sectors. Institutional involvement
    in the marketplace, most importantly through regulation, helps govern the individual or
    institutional responsibility for economic outcomes. To examine this latter shift, we draw on
    research, including work by Peter Hall, David Soskice, and Gøsta Esping-Andersen, that
    distinguishes between degrees of market intervention in a market-based system and levels
    of government spending.266

    Based on the analysis of the three arenas of work, consumption, and saving, we find that
    market intervention has decreased over the past two decades on average in all three arenas
    and for most countries. This created opportunities in employment growth as well as consumer
    surplus in discretionary goods and services, but also presented challenges in wage stagnation
    and increasing costs of basics. This is true independent of the starting point of a country’s
    institutional setup, which ranges from those with lower market intervention setups and lower
    public expenditure to those with more “coordinated” markets—in other words, higher market
    intervention—and higher public expenditure.

    Overall, the development means that individuals are increasingly responsible for their own
    economic outcomes. This “individualization” of responsibility partially explains why outcomes
    differ significantly for individuals within the same economic system.


    Institutional roles are shifting
    Institutions play important roles in shaping how risks and gains are shared. For example,
    working in a corporation that provides employee training may buffer an individual from the risk
    of skill obsolescence. The economic gains would be shared by companies resetting wages or
    paying dividends, and by governments through transfers, public pensions, or the provision of
    tax-funded services.

    We attempt to separate out three broad determinants of risk sharing between individuals and
    institutions. First is the risk sharing that takes place via markets. Second is that which occurs
    via tax-funded public expenditure. The third is determined by individual choice and action.

    In the case of markets, the role of institutions—shaped by market intervention mechanisms,
    such as regulation and policy—affects how much risk individuals bear for their outcomes.
    For example, employment protection sets standards for working contracts and price controls,
    product-market regulations, and the level of competition affect the quality and cost of goods


    266
          Academic research suggests that the sharing of risks as well as of gains typically takes two forms: via markets or via
          tax-funded public expenditure. In “liberal” market economies—to use the terminology in the literature—firms and
          market mechanisms primarily drive exchanges between individuals and institutions, including in such areas as industrial
          relations, vocational training and education, corporate governance, interfirm relations, and relations with employees.
          In more “coordinated” market economies, nonmarket forms of interaction are relied on more heavily. These can include
          factors such as employee protection and coordinated provision of vocational training. For details, see Peter Hall and
          David Soskice, eds., Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage, Oxford, UK: Oxford
          University Press, 2001; Gøsta Esping-Andersen, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
          University Press, 1990. Also see Arend Lijphart, Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance in Thirty-
          Six Countries, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2012; André Sapir, “Globalization and the reform of European social
          models,” Journal of Common Market Studies, June 2006, Volume 44, Issue 2.




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    95


          and services available to consumers. Other policies mandate the level of institutional savings
          on behalf of individuals to ensure that they have sufficient wealth for their pensions.

          In the case of public expenditure, the level of direct spending by government institutions
          determines the level of risk borne by individuals versus that absorbed by public resources.
          For example, government spending on public-sector wages helps insulate workers from labor
          market volatility, while spending on housing, healthcare, and education helps consumers cope
          with the rising cost of basic goods and services.267

          While public- and private-sector institutions play important roles, individual action mostly
          determines the distribution of risks and gains. For example, individuals choose the extent to
          which they invest time in education, offer their labor, limit consumption within their means,
          and manage their savings.

          Exhibit 24 summarizes these drivers of individual outcomes, highlighting major disruptive
          trends shaping the economic environment, institutional sharing of gains and risks via markets,
          and public expenditure, as well as the role of individuals themselves. A higher degree of
          market intervention and public spending entails lower responsibility for individuals and
          vice versa.

          While individual responsibility is difficult to quantify, we developed two composite indexes
          to analyze the role of institutions in the social contract and how this role has shifted over the
          past two decades. Our results suggest that the sharing of risk and gains through markets has
          declined, exposing individuals to both opportunities and challenges, even as governments
          have stepped up spending on individuals.




Our research suggests that individuals
are increasingly responsible for
their own economic outcomes.
          Institutional intervention has declined, partially explaining both positive and challenging
          developments of economic outcomes
          Institutions can intervene in markets through different forms between enforced market
          intervention via regulation and a more “liberal” setup allowing market forces and choices by
          individual firms to influence outcomes to a larger extent, as discussed by Hall and Soskice.268
          Over the past two decades, almost all economies have trended toward a less interventionist
          setup, which can be linked to positive developments in economic outcomes, such as lower


          267
                The debate over how to classify “welfare” spending by the government, especially in the United States, is substantial.
                According to the US Congressional Budget Office, the federal government spent $982 billion on Social Security for all
                retired workers and their spouses and children in 2018. The government spent $1 trillion on major healthcare programs,
                primarily Medicare ($705 billion) for workers over the age of 65 and those with disabilities, and $389 billion on Medicaid
                for those with low incomes. The government provided $285 billion for “income security,” which includes unemployment
                compensation, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), the refundable portion of the earned income and child tax credits,
                the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, or food stamps), family support, child nutrition, and foster
                care. Many of these programs benefit low-income individuals, who are not the only beneficiaries. According to the
                Congressional Budget Office’s analysis of the distribution of household income in 2016, households in the lowest quintile
                are the primary beneficiaries—receiving 52 percent—of means-tested transfers, including Medicaid, the Children’s
                Health Insurance Program (CHIP), SNAP, and SSI. The highest income quintile receives 4 percent of all means-tested
                transfers, while the second through to the fourth quintiles account for the remaining 44 percent. Households in the
                highest quintile also receive support from Medicaid and CHIP (5 percent of total means-tested transfers in this category),
                SNAP (2 percent), SSI (4 percent), and other transfers (3 percent). See The distribution of household income 2016,
                Congressional Budget Office, July 2019, and Updated budget projections: 2019 to 2029, Congressional Budget Office,
                May 2019.
          268
                The authors define “liberal” as less regulated and “coordinated” as more regulated.




96        McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 24

Outcomes for individuals are driven by changes in major trends and changes within the
social contract.

Major trends shaping the                            Responsibilities between institutions and individuals in the social
economic environment                                contract

                                                    Role of institutions                                         Role of individuals
1. Economic growth
   (structural, e.g., low
   productivity growth,
   and cyclical, e.g.,
   global financial crisis)
2. Technology (AI,                                          Market
   automation,                                                                         Public-sector                    Individual                           Individual
                                                         intervention
   digitization)                                                                         spending                     responsibility                         outcomes

3. Globalization (flows of
   people, capital, and
   goods and services)
4. Demographics (low
   birth rates and aging)
                                              Institutions coordinating               Institutions providing           Individuals taking
5. Gender roles                                 markets for workers,                     direct support to             actions to prepare
6. Structural changes                          consumers, and savers                     cushion impact of               themselves for
                                              to manage progress and                   external shocks and              changing trends
7. “Superstar” effects                              mitigate risks                      improve outcomes                 and challenges

Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis



                                             prices of discretionary goods and services benefiting consumers, as well as challenging
                                             developments that include lower guaranteed pension levels.

                                             Our composite index tracking the role of institutions in coordinating outcomes consists
                                             of indicators in each of the three arenas. For each indicator, we took the simple average
                                             of 22 countries where data was available. To simplify the illustration of the changes, we
                                             then compiled the simple average of the indicators in each arena.269 Finally, we created an
                                             aggregate market intervention index by taking the simple average of the three arenas. Our
                                             results show that the institutional role in market intervention declined in each arena, while the
                                             aggregate index fell by 13 points, from 100 to 87, between 2000 and 2018 (Exhibit 25).

                                             For workers, the shift in institutional roles toward less market intervention is marked by more
                                             relaxed employment protection legislation (in 12 of 22 countries) and a continued decrease
                                             in collective agreements coverage (in 14 of 22 countries).270 These changes have been linked
                                             to increasing employment rates, by decreasing the risk of hiring, as well as an increasing
                                             polarization of wage development, as less collective agreements coverage translates into
                                             wages linked more closely to individual negotiations rather than pooling and sharing of risks



                                             269
                                                   We acknowledge that some components of the index might be more important than others, but we do not attempt to
                                                   adjust for this; rather, we take simple averages in each arena and at the overall level.
                                             270
                                                   To assess worker protection levels, we used the OECD’s employment protection index, which covers 25 metrics including
                                                   notification procedures for individual or collective redundancies, notice periods before dismissal, severance pay linked
                                                   to tenure, and procedures to protect against unfair dismissals. For temporary workers, the indexes cover the legality of
                                                   using fixed-term contracts or temporary work agencies, limitations on the number of cumulative fixed-term contracts
                                                   offered to workers, and equal treatment of regular and agency workers within a company, among others. We also
                                                   measure the proportion of employees covered by collective agreements. Collective agreements are legal agreements
                                                   negotiated at the firm, sector, or national level that cover mutually agreed-upon wage levels and wage increases in
                                                   addition to nonworking conditions such as vacation arrangements, training, and employment protections, among other
                                                   things. See OECD employment outlook 2018, OECD, 2018.




                                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     97


Exhibit 25

Market intervention by institutions declined by 13 points.
Market intervention by institutions for workers, consumers, and savers;
composite index (2000 = 100), simple average of 22 countries

                                                                                               Less coordi-           More coordi-              2000 (or         2018 (or
Change between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest)                                       nated markets            nated markets             earliest)         latest)
Workers            Employment protection (permanent
                   contracts), index, 0–6 scale                                                             -7                                      2.1                 2.0


                   Employment protection (temporary
                                                                                                  -15                                               1.7                 1.5
                   contracts), index, 0–6 scale

                   Collective agreements coverage, percent
                                                                                                           -8                                       64                  58
                   of employees

                   Workers subindex
                                                                                                        -10
                   (simple average of 3 components)

Consumers Product market regulations for telecom,
          transportation, and utilities, index, 0–6                              -33                                                                3.1                 2.1
          scale

                   Retail price controls, index, 0–6 scale                              -26                                                         2.1                 1.5


                   Housing: social rental housing stock,
                                                                                                                -5                                 10.9             10.4
                   percent of housing stock

                   Housing: intensity of rent control, index,
                                                                                                           -8                                      0.41             0.38
                   0–1 scale

                   Healthcare: level of market intervention in
                                                                                                  -15                                              100                  85
                   healthcare,1 index, 0–100 scale

                   Education: level of market intervention in
                                                                                       -27                                                         100                  73
                   education,1 index, 0–100 scale

                   Consumers subindex
                                                                                               -19
                   (simple average of 6 components)

Savers             Net replacement rate from mandatory
                                                                                                  -15                                               69                  59
                   pensions, percent of average wage2

                   Proportion of defined-benefits assets
                                                                                                                -3                                  65                  63
                   under management, percent of total AUM

                   Savers subindex
                                                                                                         -9
                   (simple average of 2 components)

                   Market intervention by institutions
                                                                                                     -13                                           100                  87
                   (simple average of 3 subindexes)


1 Index to proxy role of institutions: inverse of out-of-pocket voluntary spending in healthcare, and private spending.
2 For male workers, only Australia (+1.7%) and Switzerland (+1.3%) have differences with female workers.
Note: Simple averages are used to highlight the roles of institutions in 22 different countries and systems.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; ILO; World Bank; national accounts data, national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index;
        McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




98                                          McKinsey Global Institute


and gains.271 In Germany, for example, the government relaxed legislation for hiring temporary
workers, which has contributed to a rapid increase in their employment but also to a growing
share of lower-wage jobs.272

For consumers, the shift in institutional roles toward less market intervention was seen in the
substantial reduction in product-market regulations for telecommunications, transportation,
and utilities, and retail price controls.273 This stimulated market competition and helped push
down prices for many goods and services, especially for data and other communications
costs. For instance, between 2012 and 2017, the cost of data fell by 89 percent and usage
surged tenfold in nine countries, as discussed in chapter 3.

At the same time, reductions in the level of market intervention in housing—seen in the
decline in social housing stock as a percent of total housing stock and in declining intensity
of rent control—went hand in hand with rising housing costs.274 Increasing private-sector
investment in real estate is not leading to a sufficient increase in supply that might lower
prices. This is partly because of strict zoning and limited public-sector infrastructure
investment, and partly because of speculative investment in current housing stock driving up
prices. Similarly, the increase in out-of-pocket spending on healthcare and private spending
on education suggests a shift to a lower institutional role in coordinating these markets
for consumers.

For savers, the access to greater opportunities provided by technology and deregulation
amounts to one shift toward a less interventionist market setup. However, the signs of
less institutional market intervention on behalf of individuals are seen in the decline of net
replacement rate from mandatory pensions.275 The ratio of defined-benefit pension plans
as a proportion of total pension assets under management declined by two percentage
points on average. These changes, prompted by demographic shifts and pressures on
government finances, have transferred the responsibility for saving onto individuals at a time
when expected years in retirement are increasing, market returns on savings are low, and a
significant share of the population is not saving for retirement.

The overall decline in institutions playing a coordinating role was evident in 19 out of
22 countries in our sample. New Zealand, South Korea, and the United States are the three
exceptions, although they started at relatively low levels. In New Zealand, the rise in market
intervention was largely due to increased employment protection, particularly for temporary
workers, while in South Korea it rose due to higher retail price controls, lower private spending
on education, and an increase in social housing stock. In the United States, institutional roles
in risk sharing rose due to changes for consumers: retail price controls increased and out-of-
pocket spending on healthcare declined primarily due to the introduction of the Affordable
Care Act in 2010.

Increased government spending did not compensate for the effects of global trends and
the changing role of market institutions
Public-sector spending on workers, consumers, and savers refers to direct spending by
governments to cushion individuals from poor outcomes and reduce the risk they face. Our
index consists of nine indicators to measure public spending in the three arenas. Rather than
using aggregate government spending, we have focused on public spending in these markets
because it is directly provided to individuals or households.


271
      See “Protecting jobs, enhancing flexibility: A new look at employment protection legislation,” in OECD employment
      outlook 2013, OECD, 2013; Bruno Amable and Ken Mayhew, “Unemployment in the OECD,” Oxford Review of Economic
      Policy, Spring 2011, Volume 27, Number 2, pp. 207–20; Cyrille Schwellnus, Andreas Kappeler, and Pierre-Alain Pionnier,
      Decoupling of wages from productivity, OECD Economics Department working paper number 1373, January 2017.
272
      Jack Ewing, “The trade-off that created Germany’s job miracle,” New York Times, September 24, 2012.
273
      We created a composite measure of product-market regulations in the telecommunications, transportation, and utilities
      industries by averaging the OECD’s Product Market Regulation scores for five markets: telecommunications, electricity
      and gas (utilities), and road and rail (transportation).
274
      Konstantin Kholodilin, Housing rental market regulation indices database, 2019.
275
      Net replacement rates from mandatory pensions captures how effectively a pension system provides retirement income
      to replace earnings.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                   99


      For workers, the three measures are: government spending on public-sector wages; spending
      on unemployment, incapacity, and active labor market programs; and spending on training.276
      We included these three measures to capture how governments can mitigate labor market
      risks for individuals through direct support including, for example, by employing workers in
      public-sector roles that are typically more stable than private-sector positions. The public-
      sector spending indicators we included measure the financial support governments provide
      for those who have lost their jobs, are unable to work, or need retraining and reskilling for new
      roles. For consumers, the five measures are: social spending on housing, social spending
      on healthcare, government spending on education, spending on general government
      gross fixed capital formation to proxy for infrastructure investment, and social spending
      on family and other social policy areas, which includes spending on food stamps and other
      similar benefits.277 For savers, we included one indicator: social spending on old-age and
      survivors’ pensions.

      Just as we did for institutional risk sharing, we created an aggregate public-spending index
      for the three markets as well as subindexes for each market. Our initial results suggest
      that governments increased direct support to individuals amid demographic change and
      continued fallout from the 2008 financial crisis. Spending across these indicators between
      2000 and 2018 increased by three percentage points, 66 percent of which we estimate is due
      to demographic changes (Exhibit 26).278 The most significant increases occurred in Finland
      and Norway, at nine percentage points, followed by Belgium, Denmark, and South Korea,
      where the increase was seven percentage points.

      The biggest change in public spending was driven by pensions for savers, followed by
      increased healthcare spending for consumers. In 2000, 7.6 percent of GDP was spent on
      pensions, rising to 9.5 percent in 2018 on average for our 22 countries. We estimate that
      almost the entire increase was driven by demographic changes because life expectancy has
      increased, raising the number of years individuals spend in retirement. Social spending on
      healthcare rose from 5.3 to 6.4 percent over the same period, with approximately 30 percent
      of this spending due to aging. The rest was partially due to price factors, including availability
      of new products and technologies. Apart from pensions and healthcare, spending on family
      and other social policy was the only other metric that increased notably over this period.

      Over the 18-year period, public-sector spending declined in only four out of the 22 countries—
      Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Portugal. In the labor market, spending declined
      in all three indicators we measured in Germany and the Netherlands, while spending on
      unemployment and training increased in Ireland and Portugal. Germany was one of two
      countries in which spending on public pensions declined (the other was Australia), while
      spending on consumers declined in the other three countries (most notably public healthcare
      in Netherlands and gross fixed capital formation in Ireland and Portugal).

      At an aggregate level, infrastructure spending—as proxied by government gross fixed capital
      formation—was one area in which spending declined between 2000 and 2018. This may have
      been motivated by governments’ budgetary concerns in the aftermath of the 2008 global
      financial crisis. Cutting infrastructure spending was arguably a less controversial way to
      reduce budgetary constraints at a time when citizens needed additional support.




      276
            The OECD’s Social Expenditure statistics include training as a subcomponent of active labor market programs. We chose
            to separate training from active labor market programs to understand whether reskilling and retraining workers has
            become an area of increasing spend for the 22 countries in our sample.
      277
            In healthcare, social spending does not include R&D and other administrative expenses, included in total government
            healthcare expenditure. We included social spending as it covers direct support to individuals rather than system-
            wide spending. Notable differences occur in the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United States, where government
            spending is five to six percentage points of GDP higher than social spending.
      278
            We used two approaches to estimate the effect of demographics on spending by the government. For savers, we
            normalized spending on pensions by holding the proportion of elderly citizens (those aged 65 years and over) in 2000
            constant for 2018 and subtracted actual spending from normalized spending. For healthcare, to estimate the impact of
            aging, we benchmarked the average price change for different age groups between 2000 and 2018.




100   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 26

Public-sector spending increased by three percentage points, primarily due to
demographics.

Public-sector spending on workers, consumers, and savers,1
percentage points of GDP, simple average of 22 countries                                            Split of spending explained by demographics
                                                                                                                  Explained by                2018 (or
                                                                                                                 demographics,                  latest),
Change between 2000 and 2018 (or latest)                                                                                %           2000, %        %

Workers             Public-sector wages                              0.1                                                                          10.2             10.3


                    Unemployment,
                    incapacity, and active                  -0.0                                                                                   3.7              3.7
                    labor market programs


                    Training                                -0.0                                                                                   0.2              0.2



                    Workers
                    subtotal                                        0.1                                                                           14.0              14.1



Consumers Family and other social
          policy                                                           0.5                                                                     2.3              2.8



                    Infrastructure: gross fixed
                                                             -0.4                                                                                  3.5              3.1
                    capital formation



                    Housing: social spending                         0.0                                                                           0.4              0.4



                    Healthcare: social
                                                                       0.8 0.3 1.1                                            30                   5.3              6.4
                    spending


                    Education: public-sector
                                                                                     0.0                                                           4.5              4.5
                    spending



                    Consumers subtotal                                 1.0       0.3 1.3                                      26                  15.9             17.2



Savers
                    Savers subtotal                                               0.1         1.8            1.9              96                   7.6              9.5



                    Public-sector spending
                    on workers, consumers,                             1.2                   2.1             3.3              66                  37.5             40.8
                    and savers


1   Includes public-sector wages and social spending, defined as cash benefits or direct in-kind provision of goods and services, and tax breaks with social purposes;
    exceptions are education and infrastructure, which reflect total public spending.
Source: OECD; national accounts data; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                        101


40.8%
                               Overall, public spending increased from 37.5 percent of GDP in 2000 to 38.0 percent in
                               2006, peaking around 2012 at 42.4 percent on average for the 22 countries, before falling
                               to 40.8 percent of GDP by 2018. The rise around 2012 was primarily driven by increased
Public spending share of       government responsiveness after the 2008 global financial crisis.
GDP in 2018 on workers,
consumers, and savers in our   The implication of these changes for economic outcomes is that the sharing of risks and gains
22 countries, up from 37.5%    by the public sector has been unable to compensate for adverse market outcomes. Increases
in 2000                        in public-sector wages and declines in active labor market programs and training could not
                               improve stagnating wages nor polarization of outcomes. This is particularly challenging
                               because the future of work is increasing the need for reskilling. Declines in social housing and
                               rent control could not curtail soaring housing prices. Increased pension spending was largely
                               driven by aging and did not support individuals in saving or in addressing lower interest rates
                               on their returns.

                               A less interventionist market setup and higher public spending were consistent across
                               three archetypes of countries
                               In Exhibit 27, we combine the indexes for the role of institutions in market intervention and the
                               level of public spending to demonstrate how the social contract changed in our 22 countries
                               between 2000 and 2018.

                               Using the two indexes, we created archetypes of the social contract across countries. Based
                               on the index for the role of institutions in market intervention, we classified high market
                               intervention economies as countries whose index in 2000 was above 100, while those below
                               were classified as low market intervention economies. Based on public-sector spending, we
                               classified countries with spending greater than 42 percent of GDP as high spending, those
                               with spending from 35 to 41 percent of GDP as medium spending, and those with spending
                               less than 35 percent of GDP as low spending.

                               Using these classifications, our 22 countries fall into three archetypes:

                               — Countries in which market intervention and government spending are both low

                               — Countries in which market intervention is high and government spending is relatively low

                               — Countries in which market intervention and government spending are high

                               Our archetypes are not intended to determine which type of social contract is better or
                               worse. We recognize that different countries prioritize certain values that shape their social
                               contracts. The academic research highlights the vital role that cultural, political, and historical
                               phenomena play in shaping the values central to each country’s social contract.279

                               For example, countries such as the United States value individualism and limited government
                               regulation as core values, which shape government policies. By contrast, countries such as
                               Sweden and Denmark prioritize equality of outcomes for individuals in society.

                               Our results suggest that, independent of the starting point in the three archetypes,
                               institutions are intervening less to provide protections for workers, consumers, and savers,
                               while public expenditure to individuals is increasing. This trend was reflected in 15 out of
                               22 countries in our sample.

                               Austria, Belgium, France, and the Scandinavian countries constitute the archetype with a high
                               degree of regulatory market intervention and high government spending. In this archetype,
                               market intervention declined in our index by ten points, while public-sector spending


                               279
                                     Peter Hall and David Soskice, eds., Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage,
                                     Oxford University Press, 2001; Gøsta Esping-Andersen, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Princeton, NJ:
                                     Princeton University Press, 1990.




102                            McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 27

Market intervention for workers, consumers, and savers declined by 13 points, although
public-sector spending increased by three percentage points on average.

Social contract archetypes for 22 OECD countries                                                                   High intervention,                Low intervention,
                                                                                                                   high spending                     low spending
                                                                                                                   High intervention,                Average
Market intervention by institutions
                                                                                                                   medium spending
for workers, consumers, and savers,
2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest), index1                                                                     2000 average                      2018 average
                                                                                      38%           41%
    150
                                                                               Greece      +3pp

    140
                                                                                                      Norway
                                                                                               Portugal
    130                                                                                              Finland
                                                                                                           Austria            France

    120
                                                                      Netherlands
                                                                                            Italy
    110                                                                            Germany
                                                                                                         Belgium
                                                                                                                           Sweden
                                                                                Spain
100                                                                                                                                                                      100

             South Korea
                                                                                                                 Denmark                                               -13
    90                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                         87
                                                   Japan                                              Average
                                                                   Canada
                                                                UK
    80


    70
                                                 Ireland
                                                               Australia
    60


    50
                                                                                 New Zealand
                                                United States
    40

      15%             20%               25%                30%               35%               40%               45%               50%               55%               60%

                                                                                     Public-sector spending on workers, consumers, and savers,
                                                                                                        2000 to 2018 (or latest), percent of GDP2




1 Composite index for workers, consumers, and savers weighted equally. Components include workers: employment protection (permanent contracts), employment
  protection (temporary contracts), and collective agreement coverage; consumers: product market regulations, retail price controls, social rental housing stock, intensity
  of rent control, inverse of voluntary out-of-pocket spending on healthcare, inverse of private spending on education; savers: net replacement rate from mandatory
  pensions, defined benefits assets under management.
2 Includes public-sector wages, total social spending (directed at individuals and households) for unemployment, active labor market programs, training, family and other

  social policies, healthcare, housing, pensions, public spending on education, and government gross fixed capital formation for infrastructure.
Note: Our social contract archetypes are not intended to judge which type of social contract is better or worse. Different countries prioritize certain values that shape their
  social contract.
Source: Hall and Soskice (2001); OECD; Eurostat; ILO; World Bank; national accounts data; national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of
        rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey Global Institute analysis


      increased by five percentage points of GDP. This archetype includes the “Scandinavian
      model” countries, which are characterized by high levels of government involvement
      in both regulation and public spending. In 2000, Norway and Finland scored 134 and
      128, respectively, on our market intervention index, the highest among countries in their
      archetype, while public-sector spending represented 43 and 44 percent of GDP, respectively.
      Sweden and Denmark were at 103 and 94 on the market intervention index in 2000, and their
      public-sector spending was among the highest in their archetype at 48 and 47 percent of
      GDP, respectively.280

      Countries with high degrees of market intervention and medium government spending
      include Germany and the Netherlands as well as Southern European countries significantly
      affected by the global financial crisis. In this archetype, market intervention declined
      25 points, while public-sector spending increased by two percentage points on average.
      However, the countries in this archetype diverged over the two decades. Germany, the
      Netherlands, and Portugal decreased their spending by 0.6 to 1.3 percentage points.
      Greece’s institutional risk sharing decreased sharply, by 71 points, driven by reforms required
      as part of the EU-IMF bailout agreed after the Eurozone crisis, while spending increased by
      six percentage points of GDP. Similarly, Italy and Spain witnessed notable declines in market
      intervention and increases in government spending.

      Countries with comparatively low regulatory market intervention and low government
      spending include English-speaking countries as well as Japan, South Korea, and Switzerland.
      Market intervention among these countries declined by eight points between 2000 and 2018.
      Although this is the lowest rate of change among the archetypes, these countries started
      from relatively lower levels of institutional intervention, so the change is still significant.
      Public-sector spending increased by three percentage points of GDP over the same period.
      Again, these countries started from lower levels of spending than other countries. There were
      exceptions to these trends: New Zealand, South Korea, and the United States bucked the
      trend of declining market intervention, while Ireland did not increase public-sector spending.

      Among the three archetypes and 22 countries, New Zealand and Denmark are outliers in our
      sample. New Zealand’s spending is 37 percent of GDP, yet its market intervention is among
      the lowest in our sample countries. Denmark’s market intervention was 94 in 2000, yet its
      social-sector spending was 47 percent of GDP, on a par with other high-spending countries.

      Although 15 out of 22 countries reflected the aggregate trend of declining market intervention
      and increasing public-sector spending, the magnitude of the change varied by country.
      Declines in market intervention ranged from 0.1 point in the Netherlands to 71.1 points in
      Greece (increases ranged between 0.9 and 4.3 points in South Korea and New Zealand),
      while increases in spending ranged between 0.2 in New Zealand and nine percentage points
      of GDP in Finland (decreases ranged from 0.6 in Portugal to 1.3 in Germany).

      Changing institutional roles have coincided with mixed outcomes for workers,
      consumers, and savers
      Our research into the arenas of work, consumption, and saving provides evidence of a shift in
      the social contract, with increasing individual responsibility for economic outcomes and mixed
      outcomes for workers, consumers, and savers.

      For workers, lower employment protection and less coverage through collective agreements
      at a time when public-sector spending remains flat implies that individuals are increasingly
      responsible for labor market outcomes. They need to seek employment in an increasingly
      flexible market, negotiate individually for their compensation and benefits, and adapt to
      increasing fragility stemming from changing forms of employment and increasing labor
      market risks.


      280
            For further details on Sweden’s economic performance and change in role of institutions, see Growth and renewal in the
            Swedish economy, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2013.




104   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 28

Summary of outcomes: Workers and consumers have seen positive and negative changes,
while savers face negative outcomes.
Weighted average of 22 countries

Change between 2000 (or earliest)                                                             Negative         Positive                 2000         2018
and 2018 (or latest)                                                                          outcome          outcome1              (or earliest) (or latest)


Workers             Access: working-age population employment
                                                                                                                        3.0             68.0          70.9
                    rate, percent of working-age population

                    Benefits: length of paid maternity leave,2
                                                                                                                               6.8      38.3          45.1
                    number of weeks

                    Quality: job strain (more demands than resources
                    to complete their job),                                                                                   -6.6      33.7          27.2
                    percent of workers
                    Stability: combined risk of job loss, lost wages,
                    and duration of unemployment,                                                   1.1                                  3.4           4.5
                    percent of expected earnings lost

                    Compensation: average real wage growth,
                                                                                                 -1.2                                    1.7           0.6
                    percent, 3-year CAGR (1997–2000 vs 2015–18)

Consumers Price: communications, clothing, recreation, and
                                                                                                                              -6.2       0.0          -6.2
          furnishings, consumer prices,3 percentage points

                    Price: food and transportation consumer prices,3
                                                                                                    0.6                                  0.0           0.6
                    percentage points

                    Price: housing consumer prices,3 percentage
                                                                                       4.5                                               0.0           4.5
                    points

                    Quality: housing overcrowding rate,
                                                                                                                -1.1                     9.1           8.0
                    percent of households

                    Price: healthcare and education consumer
                                                                                                 1.7                                     0.0           1.7
                    prices,3 percentage points

                    Quality: expected number of healthy years,
                                                                                                                       2.2              69.4          71.6
                    number of years

Savers              Participation: household savings rate,
                                                                                                 -1.4                                    6.4           5.0
                    percent of population

                    Sufficiency: inability to face unexpected
                    expense of ~$600 (varies by country),                                        1.8                                    20.5          22.3
                    percent of population

                    Returns: median real wealth growth,
                                                                                       -4.4                                              6.4           2.0
                    percent, 3-year CAGR (2000–03 vs 2015–18)


                    Risk: Cboe Volatility Index® (VIX® Index)                                      1.2                                  15.5          16.6

1   Signs of various indicators flipped to show positive and negative outcomes. Figures may not sum due to rounding.
2   Due to data limitations, we proxy benefits using paid maternity leave as an example.
3   Indexed to general consumer prices; weighted by consumption.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; World Health Organization; US Annual Household Survey; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; Cboe Global Markets; McKinsey
        Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                          105


      Consumers are increasingly responsible for covering the cost of basic goods and services
      such as housing, while public provision, intervention, and spending decline. Similarly, in
      healthcare and education, individuals are increasing their private spend in most countries.

      As institutions are less able to provide generous retirement benefits, both in net mandatory
      pension rates and defined-benefit contributions, it is increasingly important for individuals
      to prepare for retirement and manage their own assets. This leaves many at risk of relative
      poverty and dependence on social safety nets in old age.

      Exhibit 28 pulls in the highlights of our measurement of individual outcomes in all three
      arenas, as discussed in the previous three chapters. As we have seen, individuals have
      benefited in some areas, including higher labor force participation, more accessible and
      cheaper discretionary goods, and new saving opportunities. At the same time, we highlighted
      the increasing fragility of working arrangements, labor market risks, the stagnation of wages
      for a significant part of the population, a sharp increase in the cost of basic goods—most
      importantly, housing—and a growing risk of relative poverty in old age based on lower
      institutional and individual savings and lower return rates for the majority of households.
      Summarized in this way, our findings suggest some deterioration for savers and mixed results
      for workers and consumers, propelled at least in part by the shifts in institutional roles across
      the arenas.



      Our analysis suggests that almost all of the 22 countries in our sample, independent of their
      starting point, have trended toward a less interventionist market setup and increased public
      expenditure. The analysis confirms that, despite significantly improved economic outcomes
      in some areas, the current pathway has not been able to prevent polarization of wages,
      increasing costs of basics, and lower wealth levels for the majority of households.




106   McKinsey Global Institute


The social contract in the 21st century   107


© Getty images


6   Outcomes for
    different social and
    economic groups
    In the previous chapter, we examined the changing roles of institutions in the social contract
    over the past two decades and the overall change in economic outcomes for individuals
    coinciding with these shifts. The effect has not been the same for different groups of
    individuals: a more individualized social contract has meant more polarized outcomes
    for individuals.
    Some groups have benefited more. Many individuals, for instance, are seeking to take on
    responsibility for their economic outcomes out of choice, not necessity. Independent workers
    are often more satisfied because they can work flexibly; full-time workers are increasingly
    working from home and taking sabbaticals due to lifestyle preferences. Similarly, some
    consumers and savers are making decisions depending on their preferences. With lower
    discretionary prices, they can choose to spend more on these goods and services, shift that
    spending to basics, or save for future consumption.
    Moreover, the shift to individualized responsibility has taken place even as technology is
    offering some inclusive solutions to managing individual risks. For example, the gig economy
    offers avenues for additional income and platforms for job matching. Online education is
    creating alternatives to high-cost university degrees, while online medical consultations
    are supplanting in-person visits. Yet, these technological innovations and forces that create
    opportunity for many have not been sufficient to overcome the profound changes to the social
    contract for others. Some groups have experienced the negative shifts in economic outcomes
    particularly starkly. For example, many mid-skill and mid-wage workers have been squeezed
    out of the job market, while lower-skill workers have faced pressure to stretch their incomes to
    cover the rising cost of basics, and suffered from inadequate savings and rising indebtedness.
    In this chapter we investigate perhaps the most profound implication of a more individualized
    social contract—the polarization between those able to take advantage of new opportunities
    and those who have not been able to do so. We highlight the considerable variation among
    social and economic groups, and call out the groups most affected by the changes, for better
    and for worse.


    The changes created opportunities for high-income groups and women,
    but challenges for middle- and low-income groups and the young
    Changes over the past two decades affected different groups based on their income
    and wealth levels, age, and gender. Our research was limited by a lack of consistent and
    comparable data for all social groups and all countries, including for ethnic minorities (see
    Box 4, “Outcomes for minority groups in the United States”). However, using the available
    data, we highlight social and economic groups that were able to take advantage of the greater
    opportunities in the three arenas and those who fell behind.

    High-skill workers have benefited, while outcomes have deteriorated for many low- and
    middle-skill workers
    In work, consumption, and saving, high-skill, high-income, and wealthy groups in our
    22 countries have largely benefited. Exhibit 29 shows how in most of the 11 metrics we
    consider, the top two quintiles of the population outperformed the bottom three quintiles,




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                      109


      a population of approximately 500 million people.281 These metrics include absolute levels
      as well as change metrics, which imply that the gap between the top and bottom quintiles
      is increasing. For workers, middle segments faced the most negative outcomes, while in
      consumption and saving, the lowest income and wealth groups appeared to have fared worst.
      Data limitations make a closer examination and comparison among groups challenging.



      281
            Estimated as the 15+ population in the bottom three quintiles of the income distribution. OECD Population statistics,
            2019.




            Box 4
            Outcomes for minority groups in the United States

            An analysis of outcomes for individuals from different ethnicities in our 22 focus
            countries is not possible because of a lack of comparable data. However, pertinent
            data are available for the United States, including a landmark 2019 study by the
            Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.1 It showed that families struggling the most tend to
            be black or Hispanic, young, and both with and without a college degree.

            Between 1989 and 2016, the share of households headed by a black or Hispanic
            person rose from 20 to 25 percent—yet their share of household wealth barely
            changed. In 2016, white families owned 89 percent of the wealth in the United States,
            while black and Hispanic families each owned about 3 percent. The wealth of the
            median white family was ten times higher than the wealth of the median black family
            and 7.5 times higher than the median Hispanic family.2

            Tertiary education is not helping close the wealth gap enough. Between 1989 and
            1998, the median college-educated black and Hispanic household had 31 percent
            and 34 percent, respectively, of the wealth of the median college-educated white
            household. Between 2010 and 2016, the gap had widened: the median college-
            educated black and Hispanic household had 17 and 19 percent of the wealth of the
            median college-educated white family.

            Prior MGI research has highlighted the fact that unemployment rates among the black
            population in the United States were consistently higher than for the white population
            between 2000 and 2017, peaking after the financial crisis. 3 Looking ahead, the impact
            of automation could affect some minority groups severely due to lower educational
            attainment. For example, Hispanic workers in the United States are overrepresented in
            food service roles and have the highest rate of potential displacement at 25.5 percent
            (or 7.4 million individuals). 4 Similarly, African Americans may have a higher rate of job
            displacement in 13 community archetypes analyzed compared with other groups,
            adding up to almost 19 million people by 2030. 5




            1
                The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis focused on wealth inequality between households, arguing that wealth
                enables families to invest in their well-being while income enables them to meet their day-to-day needs. See
                Ana Kent, Lowell Ricketts, and Ray Boshara, What wealth inequality in America looks like: Key facts and figures,
                Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 14, 2019.
            2
                Ana Kent, Lowell Ricketts, and Ray Boshara, What wealth inequality in America looks like: Key facts and figures,
                Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August 14, 2019.
            3
                Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications, McKinsey Global Institute, June 2019.
            4
                The future of work in America, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2019.
            5
                The future of work in black America, McKinsey & Company, October 2019.




110   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 29

Outcomes by income and wealth group: High-income groups have benefited, while
low- and middle-income groups face negative outcomes.

Average of primarily 8 countries: France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States 1

                                                                            Worse than average                               Better than average                No data
                                                                                                            Income/wealth quintile
                   Expectation           Outcome                                                    Average Lowest   2       3                           4      Highest

Workers            Access                Change in employment share for low-,
                                         middle-, and high-skill, -wage occupations
                                         in 16 European countries and United                                -        2.7          -         -6.6         -         3.9
                                         States, percentage points, 2000–18
                   Compensation Change in real median wage for low-,
                                middle-, and high-wage occupations in                                    3.8         5.3          -          1.1         -         7.3
                                United States, percent, 2000–18

                                         Change in share of income in
                                         17 countries,2 percentage points,                                  -        -0.6       -0.6        -0.2        0.1         1.2
                                         2000–17 (or latest)

Consumers Prices and                     Change in share of spending on
          affordability                  housing, healthcare, and education in
                                                                                                         5.7          9.1        7.1        5.5         4.0        2.7
                                         Germany, Spain, and United States,
                                         percentage points, 2000–17
                   Access                Cost of minimum acceptable housing
                                         in Japan, United Kingdom, and United
                                                                                                          13          43         22          15          11          7
                                         States, percent of disposable
                                         income, 2014
                   Quality of            Change in rate of housing
                   outcomes              overcrowding in France, Germany, Italy,
                                                                                                        -0.1         0.9         0.2        -0.3       -1.3        0.1
                                         Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,
                                         percentage points, 2005–17
                                         Change in share of people who rate
                                         health as good/very good in 10                                  3.4         4.0          -         3.4          -         2.8
                                         countries,3 percentage points, 2005–17

Savers             Participation         Median savings as share of disposable
                                         income in Germany, Spain, Sweden, and                            20         -14          9          20         29         40
                                         United Kingdom, percent, 2015

                                         Change in median savings as share of
                                         disposable income in Germany, Spain,
                                         Sweden, and United Kingdom,                                      1.6        -3.1        -1.7       0.5         2.1        3.5
                                         percentage points, 2010–15

                   Sufficient            Change of share of wealth in 16
                   wealth                countries,4 percentage points,                                     -        -0.1       -0.1        -0.1       -0.9         1.2
                                         2009–16

                   Returns on            Rate of return on wealth assets by
                   wealth                quintile in France and United States,                           2.8         0.0         0.6        3.2         4.4        5.8
                                         percent, 2014 and 2017


1   We focused on 8 countries and 11 indicators due to limited data covering both socioeconomic group and country. As a result, this chart focuses on a narrower set of
    outcomes to illustrate differences across socioeconomic groups. Data availability for each indicator and country varies.
2   Data missing for Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, and Sweden.
3   Countries include Australia, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States.
4   Mapping data on change in share of wealth in bottom 60 percent to 1st, 2nd, and 3rd quintiles, average of top 5 percent and 10 percent to 4th quintile; and top 1
    percent to 5th quintile.
Source: Eurostat; US Department of Labor; UNU-Wider; World Bank; national statistics agencies; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                       111


      As discussed in chapter 2, approximately 115 million high-skill, high-wage workers in
      16 European countries and the United States saw their employment share rise by almost four
      percentage points between 2000 and 2018.282 Their real wages and share of total income
      have grown faster as well.

      Those in the middle have experienced some negative outcomes in the labor market, with the
      employment share dropping by more than six percentage points between 2000 and 2018—an
      indication of what some academics refer to as a “hollowing out” of roughly 120 million middle-
      skill, middle-wage jobs in Europe and the United States.283

      For 95 million low-skill, low-wage workers in Europe and the United States, employment
      shares increased by 2.7 percentage points. This cohort includes some workers who had
      previously been employed in middle-wage jobs. However, the share of total income for the
      bottom two quintiles dropped by 1.2 percentage points between 2000 and 2017 on average
      in 17 economies in our sample, although wages for this group increased moderately in the
      United States.

      In consumption, the top quintiles spend a lower share on basics, and therefore this ratio
      changed less markedly as prices of housing, healthcare, and education rose. The lowest
      income quintile saw its share of basics rise from 40 to 49 percent, compared with 37 to
      43 percent for the highest quintile in Germany, Spain, and the United States on average.
      Compared with the lowest quintile, for which the cost of “minimum acceptable housing” is
      43 percent of disposable income, the top quintile’s proportion is just 7 percent and the fourth
      quintile’s 11 percent—in other words, between one-sixth and one-quarter of the proportion
      that low-income people would have to spend.284 In healthcare, higher income groups
      witnessed a small change in the percentage of people who perceive health as good or very
      good. However, this is driven by already-high levels of satisfaction among higher-income
      groups. At the same time, those in the low- and middle-income group are catching up with
      higher-income groups—in other words, their self-reported satisfaction with their health is
      increasing more rapidly. In absolute terms, the lowest quintile’s health satisfaction rose from
      59.9 percent to 63.9 percent (an increase of 4.0 percentage points), while the highest income
      quintile’s satisfaction rose from 78.8 percent to 81.6 percent (2.8 percentage points).

      Saving rates for the top quintile are high, at 40 percent of disposable income in 2015 on
      average in four European countries. They have risen by 3.5 percentage points since 2010. By
      contrast, the lowest income quintile has negative saving rates, averaging negative 14 percent
      of disposable income. This figure has declined by 3.1 percentage points since 2010. The share
      of the wealth of the top 20 percent increased by 1.2 percentage points while, for other groups,
      it declined by the same amount between 2009 and 2016, as wealth inequality increased. As
      illustrated by France and the United States, the rates of return on assets held by wealthier
      groups such as housing and bonds have increased, compared with deposits and vehicles held
      by poorer groups.285

      Young people have fared worse than prime-age adults and the elderly
      Outcomes differed considerably by age group. In general, young people between 15 and
      30 years old have experienced deteriorating outcomes in all three arenas, while the elderly
      aged 65 and over have broadly benefited (Exhibit 30).

      Between 2000 and 2018, the employment rate of young people declined by 4.1 percentage
      points while that of the elderly increased by 4.2 percentage points. For the young, this decline


      282
            European Center for the Development of Vocational Training (CEDEFOP); Occupational Employment Statistics, US
            Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2018.
      283
            See, for example, John Komlos, “Hollowing out of the middle class: Growth of income and its distribution in the US,
            1979–2013,” Challenge, 2018, Volume 61, Issue 4; Peggy Hollinger, “A hollowing middle class,” OECD Observer, 2012.
      284
            A basic socially acceptable standard housing unit is defined by a particular community’s view of what is required for
            decent living, which varies by city and country. For further details, see A blueprint for addressing the global affordable
            housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2014.
      285
            Data for vehicles available in the United States only.




112   McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit 30

Outcomes by age group: Younger generations are facing challenges.
Average of primarily 9 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Italy, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States1
                                                                 Youth (15–29)               Prime-age adult (30–64)                    Elderly (65+)            Average

                                                                                                       Worse                                                        Better
                   Expectation           Outcome                                                       outcome                                                   outcome2

Workers            Access to             Change in employment rate, average
                   work                  of 22 countries, percentage points,                                                                               4.2
                                         2000–18
                                                                                                          -4.1                            3.0
                                                                                                                                                           3.8

                                         Unemployment rate, average of 22
                                         countries, percent, 20173                                                                                     5.1
                                                                                                               14.1                       5.8          4.7


                   Compen-               Median equivalized net income growth,
                   sation                average of France, Germany, Italy, and                                                                          39
                                         United Kingdom, percent, 2004–17                                                            24
                                                                                                                                       28              30

Consumers Prices and                     Share of housing, healthcare, and                                                                         31.8
          affordability                  education in spending, average of
                                         Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and                                                        38.2               34.0
                                         United Kingdom, percent, 20153                                                                              34.2

                                         Change in share of housing, healthcare,
                                         and education in spending, average of
                                         Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and United                                      5.5               2.7         2.3       0.8
                                         Kingdom, percentage points, 1999–2015

                   Access                Cost of minimum acceptable housing,
                                         cities in United Kingdom and United                                                                         13
                                         States, percent of income, 20144                                                          23      16        14

                                         Share of people with tertiary education,
                                         average of Canada, France, Germany,                                                                      39
                                         Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and United                                                        33
                                                                                                                                                  36
                                         States, percent, 20175

Savers             Participation Savings rate, average of Germany, Italy,                                                              21.0
                                 Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,                                                        4.6        21.0
                                 percent of disposable income, 2015                                                                                 22.4


                                         Change in savings rate as percent of
                                         disposable income, average of Germany,                                                  0.4              0.8
                                         Italy, Spain, Sweden, and United Kingdom,
                                         percentage points, 2010–15                                                                       0.5                             9.5

                   Sufficient            Change in average adult wealth,
                   wealth                France, percentage points, 1970–2010                                                                      -13
                                                                                                                                   -14                               16
                                                                                                   -29
1   Data limitations affected calculation of outcomes for workers, savers, and consumers by both age group and country. As a result, we focused on a narrower set of
    illustrative outcomes.
2   Position of points are calculated as: (indicator value – average value)/average value; signs are reversed if a higher number indicates a worse outcome, e.g., sign for
    unemployment is reversed.
3   Youth mapped to under 30; adult is averaged of 30–44 and 45–59; and elderly is 59 and over.
4   Average cost of minimum acceptable housing in all cities with data availability.
5   Youth not tracked because large proportion in/not eligible for tertiary education.
Source: Eurostat; OECD; US Department of Labor; national statistics agencies; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                         113


                             is partly because more people are staying in tertiary education, often to acquire new skills
                             but also because some struggle to find well-paid, high-quality jobs. The increase in elderly
                             employment may reflect many individuals’ choice to work longer. However, it may also be a
                             result of higher retirement ages in some countries, as well as increasing pressure to work
                             to earn and save more at a time when costs of basics are rising and institutional pensions
                             are declining.

                             Fourteen percent of young people are unemployed in our 22-country sample, more than
                             double the average rate in all age groups, and median net income growth is six percentage
                             points behind the average. Countries exhibit substantial variations in youth unemployment,
                             which ranges from 3.8 percent in Japan to 39.9 percent in Greece. The most substantial
                             increase since 2000 occurred in Portugal and Greece, at 11.7 and 10.7 percentage points,
                             respectively. By contrast, Japan experienced the most substantial decline, dropping
                             5.4 percentage points over the same period.




30%
                             Young workers aged 15 to 24 are more likely to be on temporary contracts than older workers.
                             On average in 21 countries, 30 percent of workers aged 15 to 24 held temporary contracts in
                             2018, compared with 9.1 percent of those 25 to 54 and 7.9 percent of those 55 to 64. Once
                             again, the country differences are substantial. In Spain in 2018, more than 71.2 percent of
Percentage of workers        workers aged 15 to 24 years old were on temporary contracts, compared with 5.5 percent in
aged 15 to 24 on temporary   Australia. Italy experienced the largest increase in the share of young workers on temporary
contracts in 2018            contracts, 37.4 percentage points, between 2000 and 2018. By contrast, in South Korea, the
                             share of young workers on temporary contracts fell by 4.1 percentage points over the same
                             period. However, South Korea had the highest share of older workers on temporary contracts:
                             30.4 percent of those aged 55 to 64, and 62.2 percent of those aged 65 and older.

                             As the young struggle in the labor market, they spend a large share of their income on basic
                             goods and services. Almost one-quarter of their incomes would have to go to minimum
                             acceptable housing, compared with 13 to 14 percent for other groups in various cities in the
                             United Kingdom and United States.

                             Similarly, saving rates for the young are significantly lower than for other groups, at 4.6 percent
                             of disposable income in 2015 on average in Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden, and the United
                             Kingdom, compared with 21.0 percent for prime-age adults 25 to 64. Although they still
                             lag behind, since 2010, saving rates have improved significantly for the young, growing by
                             9.5 percentage points compared with a rise of less than one percentage point for others.

                             Compared with their peers half a century ago, young people are building wealth at a much
                             slower pace. In France, a person in 1970 had accumulated 61 percent of average adult
                             wealth by age 30; by 2010, the share of wealth had dropped sharply to 32 percent, dropping
                             29 percentage points. Similarly, in the United States, 30- to 34-year-olds had 69 percent of
                             average adult wealth in 1984 compared with 31 percent in 2017.

                             Women have seen improvements in employment and wages, but a gender gap still exists
                             Differences in outcomes also exist by gender. As workers, women have made significant
                             strides in catching up with men in employment rates. Between 2000 and 2018, women
                             increased their share of employment by 6.3 percentage points while men’s share declined
                             by 0.4 percentage point on average in our 22 focus countries. Unemployment rates in
                             2017 were almost the same, with men at 5.8 percent and women at 6.0 percent on average in
                             22 countries.

                             In compensation, the gender pay gap narrowed, with women’s compensation climbing from
                             80 to 85 cents for every dollar a man earns between 2000 and 2017. The pay gap is smallest
                             in Belgium, where the figure for women is 96 cents, and largest in South Korea, at 65 cents.286


                             286
                                   Gender pay gap statistics concern median wages and do not adjust for men’s and women’s different types of
                                   occupations, nor for other factors such as experience, responsibility, or performance. See Gender wage gap statistics,
                                   OECD, 2019.



114                          McKinsey Global Institute


This is despite women being more educated; 50 percent have a tertiary education compared
with 42 percent for men in seven countries on average.

The gap between men and women as savers is even larger: average median net wealth for
women in 2016 in eight European countries was just 62 percent of the average for men.287

Geography matters, too. Even within countries, outcomes for workers in certain geographic
regions could be more challenging than in others. Urban areas have seen faster employment
recovery following the global financial crisis.288 In the United States, previous MGI research
has shown that more than two-thirds of job growth since 2007 has been concentrated in
25 cities and particular counties; our ongoing research in Europe highlights similar local and
regional patterns.289



Our analysis and measurement of individual outcomes provide context for opinion polls
showing growing discontent among many people in our sample of 22 countries. Measured
against their expectations, economic outcomes for individuals have often deteriorated in the
labor market and for people in their role as savers. The upside for individual consumers in
more accessible discretionary goods has helped offset rising costs of housing, healthcare,
and education—although these latter increases are affecting low-income individuals and
some social groups particularly strongly.




Geography
matters.                                In the United States, more than two-
                                        thirds of job growth since 2007 has been
                                        concentrated in 25 cities and counties.




287
      Wealth and gender in Europe, European Commission, 2017.
288
      OECD Regional Outlook: Leveraging megatrends for cities and rural areas, 2019.
289
      McKinsey Global Institute: The future of work in America, July 2019; The future of work in Europe, (forthcoming in 2020).



The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                      115


© Getty images


7   Adapting the social
    contract for the
    21st century
    The social contract has evolved throughout history. As we have noted, the opportunities
    that present themselves to individuals in this new era can be positive ones, ranging from
    the chance to work independently and benefit from falling costs of discretionary goods
    and services to gaining access to capital market products that were once reserved for
    the affluent.

    At the same time, rising public discontent and the inability of many individuals to cope
    with their new responsibilities pose significant social challenges. What can policy makers,
    business leaders, and civil society actors do to adapt the social contract to today’s needs, in
    the light of our findings about shifting responsibilities and outcomes for workers, consumers,
    and savers?

    In this final chapter, we highlight the most pressing challenges that our research surfaced.
    We also showcase some of the actions being undertaken by both public- and private-sector
    stakeholders that aim to update the social contract by rebalancing responsibilities between
    individuals and institutions. These actions are illustrative of the range of measures being
    considered or implemented. They should not be taken as tried remedies for the range of
    challenges we outline. Indeed, many of the actions are pilots, untested and so far unproven.
    They often address only certain groups, and their effectiveness and scalability have yet to be
    demonstrated. The selection of examples should be taken solely as a demonstration of the
    breadth of solutions proposed, not as an endorsement of any particular approach.

    Before focusing on the challenges, it is important to remember that a foundational imperative
    is to sustain and expand the gains that have led to the positive outcomes for individuals as
    workers, consumers, and savers. Unprecedented job growth, increased access to a variety of
    goods and services, and growing average wealth are hallmarks of progress. Yet, outcomes are
    more polarized and multiple challenges remain to be addressed.


    Ten priority challenges to solve for
    In the arenas of work, consumption, and saving, we identified ten priorities that are affecting
    large numbers of people adversely (Exhibit 31). This list is not exhaustive nor in any order
    of priority; it represents key challenges that emerged from our research. Five of the ten
    relate to the arenas of work, consumption, and saving. The other five focus on social groups
    and geographies that are especially affected in all three arenas. They concern not just
    policy makers, private-sector players, and individuals, but also social and philanthropic
    organizations (see Box 5, “Social-sector and nongovernmental institutions are playing a
    larger role”).




    The social contract in the 21st century                                                       117


Exhibit 31

Ten high-priority challenges in advanced countries need solutions.


                                                                                                                                       Estimated magnitude
                                                                                                                                       of people affected, m.

Workers                 1. Persistent income polarization and wage stagnation. The uneven                                                         ~2001
                           distribution of economic gains and prolonged wage stagnation linger even at
                           a time of positive aggregate growth.

                        2. Work fragility and transition supports in an evolving present and future of                                             ~1802
                           work. Employment-related risks are rising and employment protection is on
                           the wane, partly because of the increase in alternative work arrangements
                           and growing challenges posed by automation and digitization.


Consumers               3. Challenges of affordable housing. Rising housing costs are absorbing much                                               ~1653
                           of the income gains of low- and middle-income households.

                        4. The rising expense of and demand for healthcare and education.                                                          ~1254
                           Healthcare and education costs have risen above general consumer prices, and
                           the need for more healthcare and education is likely to rise as people live
                           longer and as the nature of work changes.


Savers                  5. The growing savings and retirement problem. In a century of longer life                                                ~4405
                           expectancy and aging, how can the capacity and incentives for individuals and
                           institutions to save more, and more effectively, be expanded?


Challenges              6. The multiple pressures on low-income individuals. Low-income groups                                                    ~3356
for social                 face difficulties in all three arenas of work, consumption, and saving, and their
groups or                  position has grown more precarious than it was in 2000.
countries
                        7. A new era of challenging outcomes for the under-30 generation. Young                                                    ~1807
                           people between 15 and 29 years old have less access to well-paid, stable
                           employment, affordable housing, and decent savings than previous
                           generations.

                        8. The persistent gender and race gaps. Although women have made strides in                                               ~2958
                           the labor market, they continue to lag behind men in employment, wages, and
                           savings. Similarly, the racial gap in some countries is both persistent and growing.

                        9. The growing challenges of place. Certain regions and local economies,                                                   ~2159
                           mostly in Southern Europe and in declining industrial areas in the United
                           States where more than 215 million people live, have not recovered fully from
                           the global financial crisis, which continues to weigh on individual outcomes.

                        10. The risk of unsustainable government funding. Tax collection and                                                      ~27010
                            government revenue generation are not keeping up with government
                            spending, which has risen to support individuals coping with global trends.
                            Healthcare and pension systems in particular are coming under stress
                            because of aging populations.

1    Estimated as working-age population in middle-skill, middle-wage occupations (37% based on 16 European countries and US).
2    Estimated as working-age population engaged in independent work (28% based on 6-country average).
3    Estimated as 15 and over population who are spending more than 40 percent of disposable income on housing (mortgage repayment or rent).
4    Estimated as population aged 15–24 and 60 years and over in Australia and United States, where healthcare and education spending as a share of disposable income is
     more than 10%.
5    Estimated as 15 and over population who did not save for old age (53%).
6    Estimated as 15 and over population in the bottom two quintiles of the income distribution.
7    Estimated as share of people between 15 and 29 years old.
8    Estimated as number of working-age women in employment and minorities in United States.
9    Based on MGI’s Future of Work in America and Europe analysis.
10   Estimated as number of people who believe they could easily access public benefits if they needed them.
Source: OECD; World Bank Financial Inclusion Indicators; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




118                                         McKinsey Global Institute


First, despite positive aggregate economic growth, the labor market has distributed
economic gains unevenly. Wage stagnation has mostly affected those in middle-skill, middle-
wage occupations, roughly 200 million people in the 22 focus countries.290 The labor share
of income has dropped in many advanced economies, and wage growth does not reflect the
current high demand for labor.291 This raises questions, including the following:

— How can businesses, governments, and workers collectively increase productivity growth,
  harness technology and other forces, and ensure the recoupling of aggregate productivity
  and individual income growth for workers?

— What can be done to ensure that a higher share of income goes to labor?

— How and to what extent could education, reskilling, and better credentialing assist in
  driving wage growth?

— What should be the role of wage assistance, subsidies, and contingent transfers in
  achieving living wages?

One much-discussed approach is to focus on minimum wages.292 We note that some
governments, such as in Australia, Canada, Germany, and New Zealand, are increasing
minimum wages. At the same time, some private-sector companies are voluntarily increasing
salaries, while others are introducing measures to cap management-to-worker pay ratios.
For example, H&M is incorporating a Fair Living Wage Strategy, encouraging collective
bargaining among supplier firms.293 Other companies such as British retailers John Lewis
Partnership and Richer Sounds operate employee-ownership models, enabling employees
to share in the profits created by the business. The Mondragon Corporation in Spain is one
example of a company that operates its businesses as workers’ cooperatives, enabling
employees to contribute to the governance of the business and share in the wealth they
create.294 Dell offers benefits such as paternity leave above the statutory minimum, while
Glassdoor is trying to reduce information asymmetry by anonymously collecting feedback
on pay, benefits, and work conditions from current and former employees so that job seekers
can evaluate potential employers.

Individuals are also opting for independent work as their primary source of income or
to supplement their existing income.295 Independent workers are starting to organize in
associations such as the Independent Workers of Great Britain and are leveraging technology,
such as the YouTuber Union representing the interests of 16,000 members.296




290
      Estimated as 37 percent of the working-age population (share of middle-wage, middle-income occupations based on 16
      European countries and the United States. Excludes Germany, New Zealand, and South Korea, where wage growth was
      positive. OECD Population statistics, 2019.
291
      In the United States, labor share of income fell by 5.4 percentage points between 1998–2002 and 2012–16. Had this
      decline not occurred, the average worker would be paid $3,000 more in real terms. See A new look at the declining labor
      share of income in the United States, McKinsey Global Institute, May 2019.
292
      See, for example, David Card and Alan B. Krueger, Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage,
      revised edition, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015; David Neumark and William Wascher, Minimum wages
      and employment: A review of evidence from the new minimum wage research, National Bureau of Economic Research
      working paper number 12663, January 2007.
293
      Fair Living Wage Strategy, H&M Group, 2019.
294
      Miatta Fahnbulleh, “The neoliberal collapse: Markets are not the answer,” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2020.
295
      Prior MGI research estimated that 70 percent of independent workers prefer this form of employment, while 30 percent
      report higher levels of job satisfaction than those in traditional jobs. See Independent work: Choice, necessity, and
      the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2016. However, due to the growing costs of basic goods, some
      individuals report being able to afford only basic consumption through additional gig economy work. See “Gig economy:
      ‘It was the only way we could afford a house,’” BBC, June 28, 2019.
296
      Yvonne Roberts, “The tiny union beating the gig economy giants,” Guardian, July 1, 2018; “Technology may help to revive
      organised labour,” Economist, November 15, 2018.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    119


      Second, workers are facing rising employment-related risks and lower protection, partly
      arising from the increase in alternative work arrangements, lower levels of employment
      protection, and challenges posed by automation and digitization. This is critical in a world
      in which 28 percent of workers (or almost 180 million individuals, in 22 countries) are in
      alternative arrangements, and required job transitions linked to automation are expected to
      be in the range of 40 million to 150 million workers.297 In this respect, the social contract of the
      future will need to address several questions:

      — How can alternative work arrangements create high-quality jobs and provide additional
        nonmonetary benefits for workers?

      — How can flexible, dynamic labor markets be supported while also reducing fragility
        for workers?

      — How can workers adjust rapidly to—and be protected against—the effects of cyclical
        changes, such as financial crises, and of structural changes, such as automation and
        increased competition due to globalization and “superstar effects”?

      We are beginning to see examples of governments, the private sector, and individuals taking
      the initiative to address some of the pain points from this changing context. For example,
      several national and state governments are beginning to rethink employment arrangements
      to account for new forms of work. Among the measures are new laws aimed at protecting
      those in alternative work. For example, the state of California introduced a bill in September
      2019 that requires digital platform service companies such as Uber and Lyft to treat contract
      workers as employees, while New York State created the Black Car Fund to offer benefits to
      gig economy drivers.298 Oregon, New York City, San Francisco, Seattle, and Philadelphia have
      passed laws requiring businesses to offer workers guaranteed hours and advance notice of
      schedules to provide more consistent and dependable employment.299 The efficacy of these
      measures has yet to be demonstrated.

      Calls for large-scale retraining of workers—either providing new skills or increasing existing
      ones—have grown in recent years amid the growing public debate over automation and
      its impact on work. Some governments are increasing spending on training and reskilling
      workers who have lost their jobs or have been displaced by new technologies, enabling
      these workers to prepare for higher-paid, in-demand positions. One leading example is the
      Danish “flexicurity” model, which balances the needs of businesses against the well-being of
      workers. Businesses have the flexibility to employ and let go of workers while the government
      provides unemployed workers with sufficient income and support to retrain for an equivalent
      or better job. 300 Other spending is coming through a range of worker-support programs.
      One such approach is universal basic income, which guarantees a minimum income for all
      individuals. Universal basic income has received attention in recent years as a potential option
      for addressing unemployment created by automation and digitization, but some attempts to
      introduce it, including by Finland, have not delivered conclusive results. 301




      297
            Average of six countries (France, Germany, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States); see Independent work:
            Choice, necessity, and the gig economy, McKinsey Global Institute, 2016; Sum of the United States, Japan, Germany,
            and other advanced economies; Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of disruption, McKinsey Global
            Institute, January 2018.
      298
            Kate Conger and Noam Scheiber, “California passes historic gig economy rights bill,” Independent, September 11, 2016;
            The Black Car Fund.
      299
            Meghan McCarty Carino, “Unpredictable schedules are part of the retail gig but new policies could change that,”
            Marketplace, June 13, 2019. In a randomized controlled trial in retail stores, more stable work schedules provided a
            7 percent increase in median sales in Gap treatment stores during the intervention period, compared with control
            stores. In the aggregate, stable scheduling delivered $2.9 million in increased revenues. See Joan C. Williams et al.,
            Stable scheduling increases productivity and sales: The stable scheduling study, UC Hastings College of Law Center for
            WorkLife Law, 2018.
      300
            The Danish labour market, Denmark.dk; Catherine Stephan, Eco-flash: Ins-and-outs of the Danish flexicurity model,
            BNP Paribas, July 11, 2017.
      301
            Policy brief on the future of work: Basic income as a policy option: Can it add up?, OECD, May 2017; John Henley, “Finland
            to end basic income trial after two years,” Guardian, April 23, 2018.




120   McKinsey Global Institute


Private-sector companies are focusing on skills-enhancement programs for their own
workers in some places. Examples of large-scale schemes include SAP’s digital business
services division, with about 20,000 employees, which began implementing a comprehensive
workforce skills upgrade in 2017 to support shifts in its product portfolio toward more digital
innovation and cloud products. 302 Walmart, the largest private employer in the United States,
is exploring several plans to prepare its workforce for the future, from enrolling in online
degrees for $1 a day to trainings in analytics and transferable skills. 303 Audi runs a project
in Hungary to train its workers in pressing, bodywork, metal, and assembling units, but
also offers courses in leadership; many of these programs are open to the public as well. 304
Individuals are taking on more responsibility to improve their skills, learn new ones, and
engage in lifelong learning to stay ahead. Courses on online platforms such as Coursera and
Udacity are increasingly accessible. 305 Some private-sector businesses are beginning to
reconsider their policies for laying off workers, including redeploying or reskilling workers for
new roles and in new business units, and providing ongoing support to workers who are being
made redundant, for example through reskilling, placement support, and severance pay.
These alternative policies are likely to benefit businesses by reducing costs associated with
laying off and rehiring new workers in addition to avoiding the reputational and operational
costs associated with mass layoffs.

Academics such as Dani Rodrik and Charles Sabel are calling for increased collaboration
between public- and private-sector actors to create “good jobs,” similar to collaborative
partnerships that already exist for innovation, such as DARPA, and for regulation, such
as the approach adopted by the Irish dairy industry to meet EU regulatory requirements.
Rodrik and Sabel’s “good job” strategy incorporates three strands: extending services and
research programs for existing firms such as supporting small and medium-size businesses
with targeted public services, investing in active labor market programs to develop new
workforce skills including providing targeted funding to workers, and job creation and
attraction policies. 306

Third, rapidly rising housing costs are an acute challenge for roughly 165 million low- and
middle-income households in the 22 countries, who are overburdened by mortgage
repayments or rent. 307

Between 2002 and 2018, housing costs rose in 18 of our 20 sample countries by an average
of 21 percentage points above general consumer prices. Although this price appreciation has
boosted the wealth of many existing home owners, those looking to buy and those who rent
are spending a larger share of their income on loan repayments and rents, respectively. 308
Between 28 and 68 percent of households already find rent “unaffordable” in seven major
cities around the world, and this ratio will only increase as cities continue to generate more
jobs and attract increasing investor interest in real estate. 309 These shifts are not accompanied
by any notable changes in the space or quality of available housing. As a result, in cities from
Paris to Melbourne, teachers, nurses and emergency workers, and others on relatively low
salaries, are having to cut back on other spending—or move further and further away from
their workplaces, adding the pressure of long commutes to already-stressful jobs. 310




302
      “Building the workforce of tomorrow, today,” McKinsey Quarterly, November 2018.
303
      Julia Hanna, Walmart’s workforce of the future, Harvard Business School Working Knowledge, July 9, 2019.
304
      Audi Hungaria and the society, Audi Hungary, 2019.
305
      Jonathan Shieber, “Udacity will offer 100,000 free programming classes as part of the ‘Pledge to America’s Workers,’”
      TechCrunch, October 11, 2019.
306
      Rodrik and Sabel define “good jobs” as positions that offer stable, formal employment with sufficient legal protections,
      enable at least a middle-class existence, and offer opportunities for progression. See Dani Rodrik and Charles Sabel,
      Building a good jobs economy, working paper, November 2019.
307
      Estimated as the population over 15 years spending more than 40 percent of disposable income on housing (mortgage
      repayments or rent). OECD Affordable Housing database, 2019.
308
      On average, home ownership is 66 percent in our country sample, varying from 43 percent in Switzerland to 83 percent in
      Norway.
309
      A blueprint for addressing the global affordable housing challenge, McKinsey Global Institute, October 2014.
310
      Judith Yates et al., Housing affordability, occupation and location in Australian cities and regions, Australian Housing and
      Urban Research Institute, May 2005.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                        121


      Several questions arise to address the mismatch between demand and supply:
      — How can additional private investment expand housing supply (rather than values of
        existing real estate)?
      — How can public resources and policies address constraints and barriers in the
        housing market?
      — How can technology and regulation create productivity gains and encourage competition
        in the local construction sector?
      — How can current home owners’ resistance to legislative reform and new developments
        be addressed?


      Some cities are adopting measures aimed at improving the availability of modestly priced
      housing, although it is too early to gauge the results. Berlin recently announced one of the
      farthest-reaching initiatives: a five-year freeze on rents to taper rising costs. 311 It also aims
      to control land prices, by regulating usage more toward social housing, and will implement a
      “first right to purchase” for the public sector in any sale of residential real estate. Other cities
      are rethinking housing zoning, density, and building permit laws to encourage supply, while
      some are experimenting with policies to tackle local opposition to construction by taxing
      developers and compensating existing home owners. 312 Some countries, such as Germany,
      have been providing additional funding for affordable housing and other infrastructure
      investments. In the United Kingdom, the government created multiple schemes to help
      individuals with the rising cost of property and encourage property developers to build more
      houses. For example, the Help to Buy equity loan provides individuals with an interest-free
      loan for 20 percent of the value of a property (or up to 40 percent in London), which allows
      individuals to take out mortgages at a lower cost for the remaining value of the property.313

      As housing costs soar in superstar cities, some companies are moving to alleviate the burden
      on their employees or seeking ways to help them. Amazon, Apple, Google, Facebook, and
      other technology companies have announced plans to build homes for their employees and
      invest significant amounts in affordable and social housing, for example. 314 The beneficiaries
      of these measures, however, are a selective and relatively small group of individuals, given
      the global scale of the challenge. Individuals are also opting to relocate farther away and
      commute longer distances, live with others, or move back in with their parents.

      Fourth, rising healthcare costs are exerting substantial pressure on global healthcare
      systems, while increasing education costs could reduce access for many at a time when
      advanced skills are increasingly important. This is affecting more than 125 million individuals
      who currently devote more than 10 percent of their budgets to healthcare and education, and
      for the almost 245 million people who are primarily supported by public budgets. 315 Public
      spending on healthcare increased by 1.1 percentage points of GDP between 2000 and 2016,
      on average for 22 countries. Approximately one-quarter was due to aging, while the rest
      is explained by increases in volume and costs of goods and services. While consumers in
      Australia, Canada, Europe, and Japan spend a small share on healthcare because they have
      access to large public health systems, US consumers are significantly affected; healthcare
      accounts for 17 percent of the growth in US general consumer prices between 2002 and
      2018. Important questions to ask are:




      311
            “Abgeordnetenhaus beschliesst Mietendeckel,” Die Zeit, January 30, 2020.
      312
            Anup Malani, “To encourage new housing, tax it,” Wall Street Journal, July 7, 2019.
      313
            Affordable home ownership schemes, GOV.UK, 2019.
      314
            Conor Dougherty, “Facebook pledges $1 billion to ease housing crisis inflamed by big tech,” New York Times, October
            22, 2019; Jennifer Elias, “Apple will give $2.5 billion to address the affordable housing crisis in Silicon Valley,” CNBC,
            November 4, 2019.
      315
            Estimated as the population 15 to 24 years old and 60 and up for Australia and the United States, where healthcare and
            education spending as a share of household consumption is 10 and 12 percent, respectively, and the corresponding
            population of the other 20 countries in our sample where spending ranges from 3 to 7 percent. OECD Population
            statistics, 2019.




122   McKinsey Global Institute


— How can technology and the competitive dynamics that benefited discretionary goods
  and services be harnessed to create consumer surplus in healthcare as well?
— How can education offerings be expanded, including through technology, especially to
  low- and middle-skill individuals who may be most affected by disruptive forces such
  as automation?




    Box 5
    Social-sector and nongovernmental institutions are playing a
    larger role
    The social sector and other institutions are playing a larger role in addressing some of
    the key challenges facing the world today. We are seeing some examples of donations
    and endowments in action.
    Philanthropy has recently grown significantly; one study shows that 72 percent of
    260,000 foundations identified were established in the past 25 years. Foundation
    assets exceed $1.5 trillion, with 60 percent concentrated in the United States. They
    spend more than $150 billion annually, primarily focusing on education (35 percent),
    social welfare (21 percent), and healthcare (20 percent).1 In recent years, digital
    crowdfunding platforms have grown exponentially; founded in 2000, JustGiving has
    helped raise over $4.5 billion for charitable causes while GoFundMe, founded in 2010,
    has raised over £5 billion.2 The Money Charity in the United Kingdom provides free or
    low-cost financial advice.
    Many philanthropists have dedicated significant amounts to supporting individuals
    and causes that they are passionate about, in addition to addressing areas where the
    public and private sectors were unable to deliver. Among the largest institutions is the
    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which is expanding educational opportunities in the
    United States, among other initiatives.
    During Europe’s recent wave of migration, nongovernmental organizations played
    an instrumental role in providing food, shelter, healthcare, and even rescues in the
    Mediterranean. 3 As the climate changes, donations to offset carbon footprints, from
    flying for example, have been increasing significantly. Established institutions have
    been investing significant amounts to address certain causes; the World Wildlife Fund
    alone has invested over $1 billion since 1985. 4
    Other institutions continue to play an important role in supporting individuals.
    Churches and other religious institutions have been helping people find employment
    since the financial crisis, meet their basic consumption needs, and provide a safety net
    for the most vulnerable. Tafel, a German charity, collects food items from 930 pantries
    and distributes them to those in need. 5
    These are a few examples of the ways in which social-sector and nongovernmental
    institutions are supporting individuals, the public, and the private sector in the social
    contract. However, there are limits to this support. Compared with the public and
    private sectors, the social sector is relatively small and fragmented, is rarely able to
    drive systemwide interventions, and requires regulatory accountability.6


    1
        The global philanthropy report: Perspectives on the global foundation sector, Hauser Institute for Civil Society,
        Harvard University and UBS, 2014.
    2
        JustGiving.com; GoFundMe.com.
    3
        Europe: Refugees & migrants’ rights, Human Rights Watch.
    4
        World Wildlife Fund.
    5
        Faeimm Tang, The German “Tafel” feeding the needy, Food Explorers.
    6
        Yoni Appelbaum, “Is big philanthropy compatible with democracy?,” Atlantic, June 28, 2017.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     123


      In healthcare, South Korea introduced policies such as price controls on generic drugs in
      2012. Many countries are taxing unhealthy food to subsidize healthy options. In the private
      sector, Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway, and JPMorgan Chase founded Haven to lower
      healthcare costs for their 1.2 million employees and families. 316 As part of the initiative, Amazon
      launched a virtual health clinic including prescription services. Given the growing divide in
      technology, some are calling for private healthcare companies to share their innovations with
      public- and social-sector hospitals as well.

      In education, Starbucks is offering its employees scholarships for university degrees in the
      United States, while firms such as Penguin Books in the United Kingdom, among others, no
      longer require a four-year degree for jobs. 317 Intesa Sanpaolo in Italy is offering collateral-
      free loans to all students so that higher education can be financed. Berea College in the
      United States supports students through its endowment but also its student work program,
      which requires students to work on campus to avoid taking on massive debt. 318 Individuals
      are leveraging technology and access to high-quality massive open online courses that allow
      people to receive a free university education. 319 In addition, many families are helping their
      children with education until they can support themselves. In the United States, 20 percent
      pay for more than half of their children’s college tuition fees, and 35 percent contribute. 320

      A fifth priority is savings, as individuals save less for themselves and institutions have less
      capacity to save on their behalf. The decline in the household saving rate (1.4 percentage
      points since 2000), the more than 50 percent of households that are not able to save for
      retirement (approximately 440 million people), the 23 percent decline in median wealth since
      2007, and the reduction of net replacement rates from mandatory pensions (11 percentage
      points since 2004) all heighten financial insecurity about the future. 321 This comes at a time
      when working arrangements are increasingly alternative and fragile.

      Despite rising average wealth, approximately 170 million low- and middle-wealth savers are
      experiencing stagnant wealth growth since the financial crisis, and low or negative returns
      on investment. 322 Indeed, the risk of relative poverty in old age and the dependence on
      public-sector transfers is increasing. Estimates show that roughly 140 million to 240 million
      individuals in our 22 countries may need to downgrade their lifestyle on retirement. 323 The
      difficult questions are:
      — How can individuals be encouraged to take action for their own savings and enabled to
        make better financial decisions?
      — How can new ways be found to enable and encourage savers, including young people, and
        what can be done to persuade the elderly to stay in the workforce?
      — How can access to high-return assets be expanded to a broad base of people?
      — How can safety nets be adapted to avoid the risk of relative poverty in old age for the
        most vulnerable?
      Some governments are taking steps in this direction; pension policies in Denmark contributed
      to increasing the mandatory net replacement rate by 17 percentage points for the average
      person. This approach was mandated by the public sector to be implemented by private
      employers as well. In South Korea, basic pension programs were introduced in 2008 and


      316
            Christina Farr, “Everything we know about Haven, the Amazon joint venture to revamp health care,” CNBC, March 13,
            2019.
      317
            Sally Weale, “Penguin ditches degree requirement for job applicants,” Guardian, January 18, 2016.
      318
            Holly Honderich, “Berea College: Has a US university cracked student debt?,” BBC News, December 2, 2019.
      319
            Although not always formally accredited, they provide core skills that help individuals obtain jobs they would not be able
            to access otherwise.
      320
            “How much help do millennials get from their parents paying for college?,” Forbes, May 18, 2017.
      321
            Equivalent to 53 percent of the population aged 15 and up in our 22-country sample. Financial inclusion indicators, World
            Bank; OECD Population statistics, 2019.
      322
            Estimated as the bottom 40 percent of the wealth distribution who have returns of zero to 0.6 percent, based on data for
            France and the United States. OECD Population statistics, 2019.
      323
            Estimates from Canada and Ireland indicate that the share of households that will have to downgrade their lifestyle on
            retirement is between 17 and 29 percent; Building on Canada’s strong retirement readiness, McKinsey & Company, 2015;
            Is Ireland’s population ready for retirement?, McKinsey & Company, 2015.




124   McKinsey Global Institute


extended in 2014 to increase coverage and reduce the risk of relative poverty in old age. 324
In the United Kingdom, all employers have been required to automatically enroll their
employees in a workplace pension since 2012. 325 Employers and employees are both required
to contribute minimum pension payments, which were 1.0 and 0.8 percent of qualifying
earnings, respectively, until April 2018 and have steadily increased to 3.0 and 4.0 percent
in April 2019. 326 Companies are also directly saving on their employees’ behalf, contributing
more than the mandatory amount or matching employee contributions. PayPal has rolled
out a financial health program for its employees targeting four areas: paying a wage that
supports financial wellness, lowering the cost of employee benefits, opening opportunities for
employees to be shareholders, and launching financial planning and education offerings. 327

Many individuals are looking to new tools to help them; for instance, Monzo, the digital bank,
offers to round up all spending and send the excess to a savings account. 328 People are
leveraging apps such as PensionBee to combine their existing pensions into a single platform,
giving individuals greater oversight on retirement readiness and more control over their
investments. In the United States, citizens have long reaped the tax benefits of retirement
savings by enrolling in programs such as 401(k) savings programs, which have been around
since the 1970s.

Recent innovations are helping to maximize returns on savings; robo-advisers such as
Nutmeg, Wealthsimple, and Betterment offer affordable, tailored investment advice to
individuals, regardless of the size of their starting deposit. In addition, the proliferation of
low-cost passive investment funds allows savers access to stock market returns without high
fees; although they have existed for some time, they are becoming more prevalent. These new
technologies and products, however, require some basic financial literacy and a minimum level
of saving.

While the first five challenges focus on each of the three arenas of work, consumption, and
saving, and affect a broad public, the remaining five focus on particular social groups or
countries and regions that are affected by a combination of factors. Solutions will require
coordinated actions to support the most vulnerable groups in society as well as regions facing
particular issues.

Sixth, in all three arenas, lower-income and vulnerable groups who make up roughly
335 million individuals in the 22 countries are facing difficulties, and their position is more
precarious than it was in 2000. 329 The following three questions need to be addressed:

— What can be done to support low-income households whose finances are
  already stretched?

— How can vulnerable groups and minorities, such as black and Hispanic households in the
  United States, gain access to the opportunities and support needed?

— Can social safety nets be revamped for the current era and set of challenges?

Seventh, young people between 15 and 30 years old, who currently number 180 million, are
facing systematic shortfalls in access to stable, well-paid employment, affordable housing,
and decent savings compared with previous generations. 330

— What can be done to support younger generations in an era of more precarious work?

— How can young people achieve major milestones as they age?


324
      Sunju Lee, Social Security System of South Korea, Inter-American Development Bank, October 2015.
325
      New timetable clarifies automatic enrolment starting dates, UK Department for Work and Pensions, January 25, 2012.
326
      How much do I and my employer have to pay?, The Pensions Advisory Service, 2019.
327
      Daria Solovieva, “PayPal unveils financial health program for employees: ‘Market is not working,’” Karma Impact,
      November 12, 2019.
328
      Monzo estimates that its 1p saving challenge will help individuals save £667 a year.
329
      Estimated as the population over 15 years in the bottom two quintiles of the income distribution. OECD Population
      statistics, 2019.
330
      OECD Population statistics, 2019.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                125


      Eighth, although more than 205 million working women have made strides in the labor
      market, they continue to lag behind men in employment, wages, and savings. 331 Similarly, the
      racial income and wealth gap in some countries is both persistent and growing. For example,
      approximately 90 million black, Hispanic, and other minorities in the United States face
      higher economic insecurities. 332 How can opportunities presented by the future of work be
      harnessed to narrow the gap?

      Ninth, workers in certain regional labor markets are experiencing the continued
      repercussions of the global financial crisis and worsening individual outcomes. For example,
      regions in Southern Europe and in declining industrial areas in the United States where more
      than 215 million people live have been “left behind.”333 What can be done to better integrate
      regional labor markets and vulnerable individuals into the growing economy?334

      Finally, the risk of unsustainable government funding. Tax collection and government
      revenues have flattened and even declined as a share of GDP in many countries. 335 As
      government spending increased to support individuals coping with global trends, gross
      government debt as a share of GDP has increased by more than 30 percentage points on
      average since 2000 in 22 OECD economies. 336 Healthcare and publicly funded pension
      systems are coming under stress, particularly in countries with challenging fiscal situations
      and aging populations. Approximately 270 million people could rely on public benefits. 337
      Individuals in countries where public pensions are a high share of total retirements could also
      be exposed. What can be done to ensure the sustainability of these public budgets?


      Rebalancing responsibilities between individuals and institutions
      Over the past two decades, the trend of the social contract toward less market intervention
      by institutions combined with selected increases in public expenditure has partly contributed
      to—or at least not been able to prevent—the challenges individuals are now facing. The social
      contract of the future may need to rebalance responsibilities against these challenges and
      ensure that aggregate economic growth translates into rising prosperity for the majority
      of citizens, that household incomes are sufficient to cover basic needs and potentially a
      decent lifestyle, and that people are saving a sufficient share of working-age labor income
      for retirement.

      The balance of responsibilities differs from country to country, depending on culture, history,
      ideology, and political system. Although the current market-based social contract has been
      driving economic growth and prosperity overall, evidence is mounting that some of the
      unintended consequences will not go away unaddressed. 338

      When analyzing an extensive list of recent initiatives to strengthen the social contract, we find
      some evident limitations in the ability of all stakeholders to effect change. Among common
      approaches, five stand out:

      First, the public sector is increasing market interventions and promoting a stronger role for
      corporations. The challenge here will be to encourage coordination between public- and
      private-sector actors to avoid deadweight loss—that is, the cost to society generated by an
      economically inefficient allocation of resources within the market.


      331
            Ibid.
      332
            United States Census, 2010.
      333
            For the United States, this includes the following groups: trailing cities, Americana, Distressed Americana, and rural
            outliers. For Europe, educated and emigrating regions, aging populations, agriculture-based regions, public sector–led
            regions, and trailing opportunity regions. See The future of work in America, McKinsey Global Institute, July 2019, and
            The future of work in Europe, McKinsey Global Institute, forthcoming.
      334
            One example solution is the European Union driving redistributive policies.
      335
            See Joseph Stiglitz, Todd Tucker, and Gabriel Zucman, “The starving state: Why capitalism’s salvation depends on
            taxation,” Foreign Affairs, January/February 2020.
      336
            National accounts at a glance, OECD, 2019.
      337
            Estimated as number of people who believe they could easily access public benefits if they needed them, based on data
            for 12 countries in our sample. OECD Population statistics and Risks That Matter survey, 2018.
      338
            Joseph Stiglitz, “The end of neoliberalism and the rebirth of history,” Project Syndicate, November 4, 2019.



126   McKinsey Global Institute


Second, the public sector is increasing spending on key benefits for workers, consumers, and
savers. However, such spending increases pressure on government finances. 339

Third, the private sector is beginning to voluntarily increase engagement to address
challenging economic outcomes and rethinking its role in the social contract. One sign of
this shift came from the Business Roundtable, a group of CEOs of major US companies, in
August 2019. It announced that its members are redefining the purpose of a corporation as
caring and delivering value for employees, customers, suppliers, and communities, in addition
to shareholders. 340 Many of the changes we see and examples outlined above, however,
are limited to high-skill, high-wage service jobs at large corporations. Individuals with more
traditional manufacturing jobs or smaller employers will not be able to offer such support to
the broader population.

Fourth, the social sector and other forms of institutions have started gaining importance in
recent years. Philanthropy in education, healthcare, and social welfare grew significantly over
the past 25 years. 341 Charities that rely on donations and unpaid volunteering have also seen
significant activity. Families play an instrumental role in supporting their children in housing
and education, and their elderly relatives in healthcare. 342 However, these examples are
relatively small in scale and rarely able to drive systemwide change.

Finally, individuals are further increasing management of the social contract independently
and taking on more responsibility in the three arenas. This is resulting in better management
of a more individualized social contract rather than reversing the trend. There are also limits on
individual action. Individual finances are increasingly stretched, and elderly people may have
difficulty using certain technologies, for example. Workers in specialized fields with declining
demand may struggle to transfer their experience to areas that are potentially related but
require different skill sets. Above all, individual action in the face of global trends can feel as
futile as tilting at windmills, at a time when collective approaches appear to be waning.



Two priorities stand out from our examination of the evolving social contract and the changing
outcomes for workers, consumers, and savers in the first two decades of the 21st century.
First is the need to sustain and scale the gains that have been achieved so far and be ready to
realize the potential for further opportunities. Second is to make sure that the outcomes for
individuals in the next two decades and beyond are broader and more inclusive than they have
been in this century so far.




339
      The sustainability of public debt has been debated widely in the academic research. Using traditional approaches, public
      debt is sustainable if the outstanding public debt and its projected path are consistent with those of the government’s
      revenues and expenditures. On that metric, many countries are facing unsustainable public debt levels; however, we
      also have situations like Japan where debt to GDP is significant, yet they are unlikely to default. The IMF advocates
      taking a broader approach than debt versus revenues and expenditures, incorporating the entirety of public sector
      balance sheets. According to this approach, the net worth of most of the G-7 public-sector balance sheets are negative,
      even before taking into account the state’s ability to tax in the future. In the 17 advanced economies most affected by
      the crisis for which data are available, net financial worth remains $11 trillion (28 percentage points of GDP) lower than
      it was before the crisis. For further discussion, see Pablo D’Erasmo, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Jing Zhang, “What is a
      sustainable public debt?,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21574, September 2015. International
      Monetary Fund, Fiscal Monitor October 2018, October 2018. Xavier Debrun, Jonathan D. Ostry, Tim Willems, and Charles
      Wyplosz, “Chapter 4: Public Debt Sustainability,” Sovereign Debt: A Guide for Economists and Practitioners, International
      Monetary Fund, May 2018.
340
      ”Business Roundtable redefines the purpose of a corporation to promote ‘an economy that serves all Americans,’”
      Business Roundtable, August 19, 2019.
341
      The global philanthropy report: Perspectives on the global foundation sector, Hauser Institute for Civil Society, Harvard
      University and UBS, 2014.
342
      “Bank of mum and dad ‘one of UK’s biggest mortgage lenders,’” BBC News, August 27, 2019.



The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                     127


© Getty images


Appendix
Outcomes for individuals and changes in the
role of institutions in our 22-country sample   Exhibits A1–A4

Individual expectations and outcomes for
workers, consumers, and savers                  Exhibits A5–A8

Technical appendix                                         138




The social contract in the 21st century                     129


Outcomes for individuals and changes in the role of institutions in our 22-country sample
Exhibit A1

Summary of outcomes for individuals.

Change between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest)

                  Comparison to range of outcomes in
                  22 OECD economies




                                                                                                                                                                            United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                                                             United States
                                                                                    22 countries
                                                                                    Average for




                                                                                                                                 Germany
                                                                                                   Australia




                                                                                                                                                                   Sweden
                                                                                                               Canada

                                                                                                                        France




                                                                                                                                                   Japan

                                                                                                                                                           Spain
                                                                                                                                           Italy
                   Indicator

                   Access: working-age population employment
                                                                                       3.0         4.7         2.9      4.7 10.3 4.7               8.0 6.0 3.2              2.7 -3.4
                   rate, percentage points

                   Benefits: length of paid maternity leave, weeks                       7          18         25       26         0        0       0       0      -3         21                0

                   Quality: share of workers facing job strain (more
Workers                                                              -6.6 -1.7 NA -8.3 -16.3 -6.0 -6.7 -14.2 2.3 -7.7 -2.3
                   demands than resources), percentage points

                   Stability: combined risk of job loss, lost wages, and
                                                                                        1.1        0.8 0.6 0.4 -0.9 3.7 -0.7 11.6 0.7 -0.5 0.5
                   duration of unemployment, percentage points

                   Compensation: 3-year CAGR of average
                                                                                      -1.2 -1.7 -2.1 -0.8 0.2 -0.5 0.8 -0.5 -1.9 -3.9 -2.8
                   wage, percentage points

                   Compensation: relative poverty rate after taxes
                                                                                       1.7 -0.3 0.2                     1.5      3.5       3.2 0.0 NA              3.4      0.5              1.8
                   and transfers, percent
                   Price: discretionary (communications, clothing,
                   recreation, and furnishings) consumer prices,1                     -6.2 -9.5 -6.9 -6.4 -4.6 -4.8 -3.6 -7.3 -6.4 -8.0 -8.7
                   index
                   Price: food and transportation consumer prices,1
                                                                    0.6 -2.7 1.8                                        1.5      1.6       2.6     2.1     2.6     2.0      3.5 -1.5
                   index
Consumers
                   Price: housing, healthcare, and education
                                                                                       6.2 14.0 2.1                     6.4      3.3       5.4 -1.5 4.7            6.0 14.4 9.8
                   consumer prices,1 index

                   Quality: housing overcrowding rate, percentage
                                                                                       -1.1        NA          NA -2.6 0.9                 1.5     NA -8.9 3.4 -2.3 -1.7
                   points of households

                   Quality: expected number of healthy years,
                                                                                       2.2         2.7         2.8      3.1      2.4       2.6     2.3     3.2     2.0 2.9                     1.1
                   number of years

                   Expected number of years in retirement                             0.0 -0.9 -0.4 0.6 -0.4 -0.3 0.4 2.6 -0.5 0.3 -0.3

                   Access: net household savings rate as share of
                                                                                      -1.4          1.5 -3.6 -0.2 0.9 -4.8 -6.1 -6.6 12.0 -6.6 1.9
Savers             disposable income, percentage points

                   Sufficiency: inability to face unexpected
                                                                                       1.8         NA          NA -2.8 4.7                 7.7     NA -3.9 6.1              3.2              2.0
                   expense of ~$600, percentage points

                   Returns: 3-year CAGR of median wealth,
                                                                                      -4.4 -22.4 -3.5 -12.5 -3.9 -12.3 0.2 -18.0 -14.6 -9.9 2.0
                   percentage points


1 Indexed to general consumer prices, weighted by share of consumption.
Note: This chart is intended to be illustrative and demonstrate how outcomes have changed for workers, consumers, and savers, as well as aggregate changes in the social
  contract.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; World Health Organization; US Annual Household Survey; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; ILO; national accounts data;
        national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey
        Global Institute analysis




130                                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit A2

Changes in the role of institutions.

Change between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest)

Dark colors reflect negative values,
light colors reflect positive values




                                                                                                                                                                             United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                                                              United States
                                                                                     22 countries
                                                                                     Average for




                                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                                                                    Australia




                                                                                                                                                                    Sweden
                                                                                                                Canada

                                                                                                                         France




                                                                                                                                                    Japan

                                                                                                                                                            Spain
                                                                                                                                            Italy
                  Indicator
                  Employment protection (permanent contracts),
                                                                                         -7          12          0        2         0       -4      -16     -15     -2        -8                 0
                  index
                  Employment protection (temporary contracts),
                                                                                        -15           0          0        0       -51 -72            0      -40 -36              7               0
                  index
Workers
                  Collective agreements coverage, index                                  -7           -1         -3       4       -19        0      -7      -16     -6       -16               -5


                  Market intervention, average for workers,1 index                      -10            4         -1       2       -23 -25           -8      -22 -15           -6                -1

                  Public-sector spending on wages, active labor
                                                                                        0.1         0.0         0.1 -0.2 -1.7 0.4 -0.9 0.8 -1.8 -0.5 0.1
                  programs, and training, percent of GDP
                  Product market regulations for telecom,
                                                                                       -33 -19                   -1      -45 -29 -64 -20 -46 -28 -20 -20
                  transportation and utilities, index

                  Retail price controls, index                                         -26 -56                   0       -28 -42             0      -58 -104         0         -7             83


                  Social housing stock, index                                            -5          -8         -10       -4      -30 -12            -1      5      -18 -32                    -5

Consumers Intensity of rent control, index                                               -8         -61          -7      20       20         0      NA       0      -61         0                0

                  Inverse of out-of-pocket voluntary spending on
                                                                                        -15         -13         -15       3       23        -9      -24 -24 -71              -61               34
                  healthcare (proxy for market intervention), index
                  Inverse of private spending on education
                                                                                       -27           -6          -7       -6        2       -52      0      -21 -56 -16                        -4
                  (proxy for market intervention), index
                  Market intervention, average for consumers,1
                                                                                        -19 -27                  -7      -10       -9       -23 -21 -32 -39 -23                                 15
                  index
                  Public-sector spending on infra., housing, health-
                                                                                        1.3          1.5        1.3      0.8       1.1      0.9 2.3         0.1     1.8      4.7              2.3
                  care, education, and social policy, percent of GDP
                  Net replacement rate from mandatory pensions,
                                                                                        -15         -17 -64                7      -29        4      -32     -7      -21 -60                    -2
                  index

Savers            Proportion of defined benefits AUM, index                              -3          -11         -3      -10        0       -20     -6       0       3          6             -16


                  Market intervention, average for savers,1 index                        -9         -14 -33               -2      -14       -8      -19     -4      -9       -27               -9

                  Public-sector spending on pensions, percent of
                                                                                        1.9 -0.7 0.5                     2.7 -0.7 2.7               3.1     2.9     0.2        1.1             1.5
                  GDP



1 Market intervention indicators are indexed to 100 as average score in 2000; average of each arena is simple average of the composite indicators.
Note: This chart is intended to be illustrative and demonstrate how outcomes have changed for workers, consumers, and savers, as well as aggregate changes in the social
  contract.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; World Health Organization; US Annual Household Survey; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; ILO; national accounts data;
        national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey
        Global Institute analysis



                                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                                                    131


Exhibit A3

Summary of outcomes for individuals.

Change between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest)

                  Comparison to range of outcomes in
                  22 OECD economies




                                                                                                                                                               New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                                                 South Korea
                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                          Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                             Norway
                                                                                                                    Finland

                                                                                                                              Greece
                                                                                      Austria




                                                                                                                                       Ireland
                   Indicator

                   Access: working-age population employment
                                                                                      4.7 3.9 -0.8 4.7 -1.5 0.6 5.1                                             7.1 -3.0 1.4                      5.1 1.8
                   rate, percentage points

                   Benefits: length of paid maternity leave, weeks                    -26         4        -4         0       26        12          0           18             1       13        56             14

                   Quality: share of workers facing job strain (more
                   demands than resources), percentage points        -2.5 -4.3 -5.0 -4.0 -1.8 -3.7 -4.4 -3.1 -8.0 -13.5 NA NA
Workers
                   Stability: combined risk of job loss, lost wages, and
                                                                         0.8 -0.5 2.6 0.0 15.0 0.6 0.6 1.2                                                                   1.3      1.5 0.2 0.9
                   duration of unemployment, percentage points

                   Compensation: 3-year CAGR of average
                                                                                      -1.6 -1.5 -0.3 -1.8 -2.1 -2.8 -0.7 2.5 -2.6 -1.8 3.0 -0.8
                   wage, percentage points

                   Compensation: relative poverty rate after taxes
                                                                                      0.8 2.3 2.6 1.7                         5.1 -0.9 2.5 0.4 3.5 1.5                                           1.6 NA
                   and transfers, percent

                   Price: discretionary (communications, clothing,
                                                                                      -4.8 -5.3 -5.6 -5.5 -6.6 -8.5 -5.6 NA -6.3 -6.3 -5.9 NA
                   recreation, furnishings) consumer prices,1 index

                   Price: food and transportation consumer
                                                                                      -0.5 1.3 0.8 -1.7 1.8 -3.0 1.3 NA 1.6                                                           1.4 3.7 NA
                   prices,1 index
Consumers
                   Price: housing, healthcare, and education
                                                                                      5.6 3.9 5.4 11.6 8.2 18.5 6.4 NA 10.2 9.7 -0.1 NA
                   consumer prices,1 index

                   Quality: housing overcrowding rate, percentage
                                                                                       1.5 -2.6 2.5 0.1 -2.4 -3.2 2.3 NA -0.2 -5.7 NA -1.2
                   points of households

                   Quality: expected number of healthy years,
                                                                                      2.9 2.7 3.2 3.2 2.4 4.3 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.8 4.9 3.4
                   number of years

                   Expected number of years in retirement                             -0.3 -0.4 0.6 -0.6 4.3 4.0 -0.9 -2.5 1.2 -1.4 -0.7 0.7

                   Access: net household savings rate as share of
                                                                                      -3.8 -6.4 12.3 -3.8 -15.5 10.5 4.4                                        1.1          2.2 -7.7 0.5 4.8
                   disposable income, percentage points
Savers
                   Sufficiency: inability to face unexpected
                                                                                      -1.7 -4.2 7.0 2.5 5.6 22.4 -4.3 NA NA 15.2 NA NA
                   expense of ~$600, percentage points

                   Returns: 3-year CAGR of median wealth,
                                                                                      -9.6 -3.2 -5.0 -12.1 3.5 -12.3 -4.8 -14.9 -11.9 3.1 -7.1 -10.9
                   percentage points



1 Indexed to general consumer prices, weighted by share of consumption.
Note: This chart is intended to be illustrative and demonstrate how outcomes have changed for workers, consumers, and savers, as well as aggregate changes in the social
  contract.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; World Health Organization; US Annual Household Survey; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; ILO; national accounts data;
        national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey
        Global Institute analysis




132                                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit A4

Changes in the role of institutions.

Change between 2000 (or earliest) and 2018 (or latest)

Dark colors reflect negative values,
light colors reflect positive values




                                                                                                                                                               New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                                                 South Korea
                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                          Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                             Norway
                                                                                                                    Finland

                                                                                                                              Greece
                                                                                      Austria




                                                                                                                                       Ireland
                   Indicator
                   Employment protection (permanent
                                                                                      -18         2         3        -7 -32 -2                    -3              7           0       -66           0             0
                   contracts), index
                   Employment protection (temporary
                                                                                        0         0         0         0 -144 22                     0           36            0       -58           0             0
                   contracts), index

Workers            Collective agreements coverage, index                                0         0        -2         7       -67 -17             -5            -7           -6 -10 -2                          15


                   Market intervention, average for workers,1 index                    -6         1         3         0       -98        0        -3             12           -1      -44          -1             9

                   Public-sector spending on wages, active labor
                                                                                      -0.8 2.3             1.1 0.9 3.0 -0.6 -1.0 -1.3 2.6 -3.0 1.0 0.8
                   programs, and training, percent of GDP
                   Product market regulations for telecom,
                                                                                      -52 -41 -25 -26 -71 -40 -23 -12 -29 -59 -36 -28
                   transportation and utilities, index

                   Retail price controls, index                                       -19 -125 0                      0 -104 -97 42                               0          -42 -83 92 -14


                   Social housing stock, index                                         30         3       29 -22 NA                     -3         -7           -4            8        -9           4          -13

Consumers Intensity of rent control, index                                              0         0       -50         0        0        10          0             0           0       -40 NA                      0

                   Inverse of out-of-pocket voluntary spending on
                                                                     -13                         -5       -21 -18 -10 -45 20 -17 -12 -13 -43 -2
                   healthcare (proxy for market intervention), index
                   Inverse of private spending on education
                                                                                       36        -8 -94 -99 -40                          9         -7           10 -150 -91                         5            -1
                   (proxy for market intervention), index
                   Market intervention, average for consumers,1
                                                                                       -3 -29 -27 -27 -45 -28                                       4           -4 -37 -50                          4          -10
                   index
                   Public-sector spending on infra., housing, health-
                                                                      0.9 2.7 4.0 3.7 -2.4 -0.8 -0.7 1.6 4.2 -3.4 3.8 -0.9
                   care, education, and social policy, percent of GDP
                   Net replacement rate from mandatory pensions,
                                                                                       -5         4        24 -21 -71                   -1        -6              5          -20 14                -1 -34
                   index

Savers             Proportion of defined benefits AUM, index                            0       NA          0         0       NA NA                 3          NA             -1      NA            0             0


                   Market intervention, average for savers,1 index                     -2         4        12       -11 -71             -1         -1             5          -10       14          -1          -17

                   Public-sector spending on pensions, percent of
                                                                                       1.6 2.2 2.3 4.8 6.4 0.8 1.0 0.0 2.1 5.6 1.8 0.5
                   GDP




1 Market intervention indicators are indexed to 100 as average score in 2000; average of each arena is simple average of the composite indicators.
Note: This chart is intended to be illustrative and demonstrate how outcomes have changed for workers, consumers, and savers, as well as aggregate changes in the social
  contract.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; World Bank; World Health Organization; US Annual Household Survey; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; ILO; national accounts data;
        national housing authorities and institutes; Konstantin Kholodilin: intensity of rent control index; McKinsey Performance Lens’ Global Growth Cube; McKinsey
        Global Institute analysis



                                           The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                                                                  133


Individual expectations and outcomes for workers, consumers, and savers
Exhibit A5

Individual expectations and outcomes for workers.




                                                                                                                                                                                   United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                                                                    United States
                         Comparison to range of outcomes in 22 OECD economies,
                         2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest)1




                                                                                                                                        Germany
                                                                                                          Australia




                                                                                                                                                                          Sweden
                                                                                                                      Canada
                         No data




                                                                                                                               France




                                                                                                                                                          Japan

                                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                                                  Italy
 Expectation                Outcome2
                            Employed as a percent of the working-age
                            population, 2018
 Access to                  Change in employed as a percent of total working-age
 work                       population, 2000–18
                            Average working hours actually worked per worker, 2018

                            Statutory holiday days, 2016
                            Length of paid maternity, parental, and home care leave
                            available to mothers, weeks in 2016
 Benefits
                            Length of paid paternity, parental, and home care leave
                            available to fathers, weeks in 2016
                            Working from home, percent of workers who “usually” or
                            “sometimes” work from home, 2018
                            Percent of workers facing “job strain” (more demands than
               Safety
                            resources to complete their job), 2015
               in the
               workplace Percent of workers facing physical health risk factors, 2015
Quality




               Opport-      Percent of employees who expect promotion, 2015
               unities to
               progress     Percent of workers receiving training in their jobs, 2015
                            Involuntary part-time workers, percent of total workers,
                            2018
                            Temporary employment as a percent of dependent
 Form and
                            employment, 2018
 stability of
                            Standard deviation of employment share from historical
 employment
                            trend, 2004–18
                            Combined risk of job loss, lost wages, and duration of
                            unemployment, percent of earnings, 2016
                            Median equivalized net income in real 2017 $, 2016

                            Average wages, real 2018 $, 2018

               Growth       CAGR of median net income, real 2017 $, 2011–16

                            CAGR of average annual wages, real 2018 $, 2013–18
Compensation




                            Relative poverty rate after taxes and transfers, working-
                            age population, 2016
                            Top quintile of net equivalized income, percent, 2016
                            Change in income share for top quintile of net equivalized
                            income, percentage points, 2000–16
               Distri-
                            Bottom 3 quintiles of net equivalized income, percent, 2016
               bution
                            Labor share of income, percent of national income, 2018
                            Polarization score (change in low- and high-skill) minus
                            middle-skill, percentage points, 1995–2015

1 For indicators representing a level: color of country-specific squares reflects quintile in which value for given year sits within universe of available values for all 22
  countries since 2000 (or earliest data since then). For indicators representing a change: cutoffs between color categories defined separately for each indicator, with no
  change representing middle of “light blue” color bracket wherever possible.
2 For many indicators, latest available year is chosen for each country. Median income is in 2017 dollars, using the period end exchange rate, while average wages are in

  2018 dollars using average exchange rate for year. Both deflated using CPI but for different years.
Note: Countries selected based on population and GDP and to provide diversity in varieties of capitalism. Due to data limitations, we have created an illustrative view of
  outcomes for savers across countries that is not exhaustive. For example, data was missing on private benefits, leading to focus on holiday days and parental leave.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; UNU-Wider; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




134                                         McKinsey Global Institute


Exhibit A6

Individual expectations and outcomes for consumers.

Communications, clothing, recreation, furnishings, food, and transportation
                   Comparison to range of outcomes in 22 OECD economies,




                                                                                                                                                                                    United Kingdom
                   2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest)1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     United States
                   No data




                                                                                                                                        Germany
                                                                                                          Australia




                                                                                                                                                                           Sweden
                                                                                                                      Canada

                                                                                                                               France




                                                                                                                                                          Japan

                                                                                                                                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                                                  Italy
Expectation               Outcome
Communications, clothing,
furnishings, and recreation                                                      Communications                       Clothing                    Furnishings                  Recreation
                          Change in HICP for communications vs change in overall
                          consumer prices, percentage points, 2000–182
                          Change in HICP for clothing vs change in overall
Prices and                consumer prices, percentage points, 2000–182
afforda-
bility                    Change in HICP for furnishings vs change in overall
                          consumer prices, percentage points, 2000–182
                          Change in HICP for recreation vs change in overall
                          consumer prices, percentage points, 2000–182

                          Households with internet access, percent, 2016

                          Cellular mobile penetration, subscriptions per 100
Access
                          inhabitants, 2016
                          Total spending on nonbasic categories per capita,
                          adjusted for purchasing power parity, 20173
Quality of
                          Broadband speed, mean download speed in MB/s, 2018
outcomes


Food and transportation                                                                                                                     Food                          Transportation
                 Change in HICP for food vs change in overall consumer
                 prices, percentage points, 2000–182
                          Change in food and nonalcohol drink spend as percent of
Prices and                final household consumption, constant prices, 2000–17
afforda-
bility                    Change in HICP for transportation vs change in overall
                          consumer prices, percentage points, 2000–182
                          Change in transportation spend as percent of final
                          household consumption, constant prices, 2000–17
                          Population experiencing moderate to severe food
Access
                          insecurity,4 percent, 2016–18

                          Road quality index,5 2015
Quality of
outcomes                  Competence and quality of logistics services index, 6
                          2016



1 For indicators representing a level: color of country-specific squares reflects quintile in which value for given year sits within universe of available values for all 22
  countries since 2000 (or earliest data since then). For indicators representing a change: cutoffs between color categories defined separately for each indicator, with no
  change representing middle of “light blue” color bracket wherever possible.
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). Data for Australia, Canada, and Japan relies on each country’s CPI because HICP is unavailable.
3 All categories except healthcare, education, food, and housing.
4 Refers to percent of the population that reports “moderate” or “severe” food insecurity. Moderate food insecurity is characterized as consuming smaller quantities of

  food as portion sizes are reduced or meals are skipped. Severe food insecurity is characterized as feeling hungry but not eating, or not eating for an entire day, due to
  lack of money or other resources.
5 In-country survey participants were asked to answer the question, “In your country, how is the quality (extensiveness and condition) of road infrastructure?”
6 As perceived by logistics professionals; subindex of Logistics Performance Index.

Note: Countries selected based on population and GDP and to provide diversity in varieties of capitalism. Due to data limitations, we have created an illustrative view of
  outcomes for savers across countries that is not exhaustive.
Source: OECD; Eurostat; WEF Global Competitiveness Index; World Bank; cable.co.uk; FAOSTAT; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                                                       135


  Exhibit A7

  Individual expectations and outcomes for consumers.

  Housing, healthcare, and education
                             Comparison to range of outcomes in 22 OECD economies,
                             2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest)1
                             No data        Housing           Healthcare    Education




                                                                                                                                                                                     United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                                                                      United States
                                                                                                                                          Germany
                                                                                                            Australia




                                                                                                                                                                            Sweden
                                                                                                                        Canada

                                                                                                                                 France




                                                                                                                                                            Japan
  Expec-




                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                                                                                                    Italy
  tation                   Outcome
                           Change in HICP for housing vs change in overall consumer
                           prices, percentage points, 2000–182
Prices and affordability




                           Largest city affordability gap,3 $

                           Change in HICP for healthcare vs change in overall consumer
                           prices, percentage points, 2000–182

                           Out-of-pocket, percent of current health expenditure, 2017

                           Change in HICP for education vs change in overall consumer
                           prices, percentage points, 2000–182

                           Housing construction, percent total stock, 2016

                           Total healthcare coverage, percent of population, 2017
Access




                           Hospital beds, density per 1,000 population, 2017

                           Educational attainment, percent of population with tertiary
                           degree, 2017
                           Rate of overcrowding by households in bottom income quintile, 4
                           2014

                           Life expectancy at birth, years, 2017
Quality of outcomes




                           Low-birth-weight babies, percent of total live births, 2017

                           Change in all cancer mortality rates, 2000–16

                           Number of expected healthy years, 2016

                           Change in PISA scores, reading, 2000–18

                           Change in PISA scores, mathematics, 2000–18

                           Change in PISA scores, science, 2000–18




  1 For indicators representing a level: color of country-specific squares reflects quintile in which value for given year sits within universe of available values for all 22
    countries since 2000 (or earliest data since then). For indicators representing a change: cutoffs between color categories defined separately for each indicator, with no
    change representing middle of “light blue” color bracket wherever possible.
  2 Data for Australia, Canada, and Japan relies on each country’s CPI because HICP is unavailable.
  3 Affordability gap in dollars for households earning 80 percent of the area median income or less.
  4 Overcrowded household defined as: does not have a certain minimum number of rooms, including one room per couple, per person aged 18+, per pair of children,

    among others (see Eurostat for further details).
  Note: Countries selected based on population and GDP and to provide diversity in varieties of capitalism. Due to data limitations, we have created an illustrative view of
    outcomes for savers across countries that is not exhaustive.
  Source: OECD; Eurostat; WEF Global Competitiveness Index; World Bank; World Health Organization; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




  136                                           McKinsey Global Institute


 Exhibit A8

 Individual expectations and outcomes for savers.

                             Comparison to range of outcomes in 22 OECD economies,




                                                                                                                                                                                     United Kingdom
                             2000 (or earliest) to 2018 (or latest)1




                                                                                                                                                                                                      United States
                             No data




                                                                                                                                          Germany
                                                                                                            Australia




                                                                                                                                                                            Sweden
                                                                                                                        Canada

                                                                                                                                 France




                                                                                                                                                            Japan

                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                                                                                                    Italy
 Expectation                  Outcome

                              Net household saving rate, percent, 2017
                              Mandatory pension contribution rates for
 Participation
                              an average worker, percent, 20182
                              Home ownership rate, percent, 2016

                              CAGR of median individual wealth, percent, 2013–18

                   Growth     CAGR of mean individual wealth, percent, 2013–18
Return on wealth




                              Real return on national stock market, CAGR, percent,
                              2013–18
                              Wealth accruing to top 10 percent of wealth distribution,
                              Percent, 20143
                   Distri-    Change in wealth accruing to top 10 percent of wealth
                   bution     distribution, percentage points, 2010–143
                              Wealth accruing to bottom 60 percent of wealth distribution,
                              percent, 20143
                              Share of heavily indebted households, percent, 2014

                              Median individual wealth, real $, 2018

                              Mean individual wealth, real $, 2018
 Sufficient
                              Unable to face unexpected financial expense, percent, 2018
 wealth
                              Old-age poverty, percent, 2018
                              Change in net mandatory pension replacement rates for an
                              average worker, percentage points, 2004–182
                              Years of net pension wealth from mandatory pensions for an
                              average worker, percent of average retirement years, 20184
                              Wealth volatility, index, 2009–2017
                              Proportion of median net wealth covered by deposit
 Stability
                              protection legislation, percent, 2018
                              Proportion financially literate, percent, 2014




 1 For indicators representing a level: color of country-specific squares reflects quintile in which value for given year sits within universe of available values for all
   22 countries since 2000 (or earliest data since then). For indicators representing a change: cutoffs between color categories defined separately for each indicator,
   with no change representing middle of “light blue” color bracket wherever possible.
 2 Net replacement rate is for male workers; only 3 countries have a gender gap in net replacement rate between 2010 and 2018: Australia, 2010-18; Switzerland, 2018;

   Austria, 2004. Patchy data prior to 2010 for female workers.
 3 Or most recent available year.
 4 Simple average of net pension wealth and expected years in retirement for men and women.

 Note: Countries selected based on population and GDP and to provide diversity in varieties of capitalism. Due to data limitations, we have created an illustrative view of
   outcomes for savers across countries that is not exhaustive. For example, data were missing on private pension funds, so we focused on public pensions.
 Source: OECD; Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook; Eurostat; government central banks and statistics websites; Sustainable Governance Indicators; S&P Global
         Financial Literacy Survey; US Federal Reserve; Leger; Deposit Insurance database; McKinsey Global Institute analysis




                                               The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                                                     137


      Technical appendix

      This appendix outlines the methodology and data sources we used in this report. The first
      section on methodology is organized by chapter. The second section is a detailed table of the
      main indicators and data sources we used.


      1. Methodology
      In general, we aimed to use data for individuals where possible; elsewhere, we used
      household data. Data for workers (except median net equivalized income) reflects individual
      data. Data for consumers is primarily at the household level, while data for savers is a mix of
      both depending on the indicator.

      Time periods. We aimed to use indicators that covered the entire time period of our report,
      2000 to 2018. However, data availability varies across indicators and countries, and as a
      result, we used a five-year window around the start date (typically 2000–05) or end date
      (typically 2013–18). In some instances, we used later start dates (for instance, 2007 for
      the proportion of defined-benefit assets under management) or earlier end dates (such as
      2012 for certain South Korea indicators) if that allowed us to include an indicator or country
      that would otherwise have been excluded from the analysis.

      Weighting outcome indicators. For our outcome indicators, we adjusted most of the
      averages to reflect the population breakdown of the countries in our sample. We weighted the
      outcome indicators using the population aged 15 and older in our 22 sample countries.

      We made a few exceptions to this rule. For consumer price data, we used consumption
      weighted average, which reflects which consumers are affected most by price changes. We
      used simple averages for outcome indicators that do not refer specifically to individuals,
      such as the number of weeks of maternity leave. We used simple averages when we created
      the social contract archetypes because we wanted to characterize the systems in which
      individuals work, consume, and save, rather than the outcomes for individuals.

      Real values (controlling for inflation). GDP and consumer price index (CPI) deflators were
      used for nominal values, depending on the most relevant indicator. A GDP deflator was used
      if the underlying data was national accounts data. For example, data on real wealth was used
      throughout the report. The nominal data, from the Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report series,
      was deflated using the OECD CPI deflator.

      Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices or CPI figures from national statistics agencies were
      used for survey-based data. For example, for average wages and median net equivalized
      income, we deflated nominal figures using the consumer price index. This offers the closest
      proxy for deflating consumption at a global level. The average exchange rate for 2018 was
      then applied to convert nominal local currency units into real dollars for 2018.

      Population. The total population in our sample countries is 994 million, of which 834 million
      are aged 15 years and over, and the working-age population (15 to 64 years) is 642 million.

      Chapter 2: Individuals as workers
      Demographic factors affecting the labor market
      In all 22 countries, the working-age population (15 to 64 years) declined as a share of the total
      population aged 15 years and over. In aggregate, the employment rate of the working-age
      population as a share of the population aged 15 years and over declined by 1.4 percentage



138   McKinsey Global Institute


points between 2000 and 2018. This trend was present in 12 countries, ranging from a
decline of 0.03 percentage point in the United Kingdom to a decline of 5.8 percentage points
in the United States over the same period. The employment rate increased in ten countries,
including Germany (4.8 percentage points), New Zealand (3.2), and Spain (3.2). However, the
share of the population aged 65 years and over who are employed increased 4.2 percentage
points between 2000 and 2018.

Measuring productivity in service sectors
Quantifying “output” in many service sectors, especially in healthcare and education, is a
challenge, and quality improvements such as new technologies can be tough to capture. A
substantial number of free customer services (such as search engines and mobile GPS) have
contributed to productivity improvements that are not currently being captured. In addition,
nondigital factors such as the globalization of value chains and profit shifting, as well as
investment in intangibles, contribute to the difficulty of measuring productivity in the service
sector. According to Alpert et al., the overall decline in job quality in the United States since
the 1990s has partially been driven by the decline in manufacturing jobs, which have largely
been replaced by lower-quality service jobs. 343

The rise of the nonworking working-age population in the United States
The rise in nonworking working-age persons may be due to early retirement, family care
responsibilities, illness and disability, inability to move to areas with jobs, being discouraged
from finding jobs (for example, due to a lack of suitable jobs, lack of skills, or a criminal
record). Nearly one in 12 American men between the ages of 25 and 54 are ex-offenders,
which substantially affects their prospects for employment after incarceration. An alternative
argument is that the quality of jobs (as measured by weekly wages) has declined and no longer
meets the reservation wages of the working-age population, contributing to a rise in the
nonworking working-age population in the United States. The reservation wage is the lowest
wage at which a worker would accept a job. 344

Alternative approaches to measuring job quality
Alternative methods of measuring the quality of jobs include the United States Private Sector
Job Quality Index, which measures the number of jobs paying above the weekly average wage
divided by the number of jobs paying below the weekly average wage out of all production
and nonsupervisory jobs. According to this metric, the quality of jobs in the United States has
declined since 1990, with the concentration of high-quality jobs falling from 94.9 in 1990 to
79.0 in July 2019. The authors also found that the gap in weekly average wages between high-
quality and low-quality jobs has widened since 2004. Dani Rodrik and Charles Sabel define
“good jobs” as positions that offer stable, formal employment with sufficient legal protections,
enable at least a middle-class existence, and offer opportunities for progression. 345

Occupational polarization in the United States and the European Union
Assessing polarization by occupation in Europe compared with the United States: For
European countries, data used is from the European Centre for the Development of
Vocational Training. Occupations were split into skill levels based on methodology from the
OECD. 346 High-skill occupations include jobs classified under the ISCO-88 major groups 1, 2,
and 3. Middle-skill occupations include jobs classified under the ISCO-88 major groups 4, 7,
and 8. Low-skill occupations include jobs classified under the ISCO-88 major groups 5 and 9.




343
      See McKinsey Global Institute, Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand and the promise of digitization,
      February 2018; Daniel Alpert et al., The US private sector Job Quality Index, Cornell Law School, November 2019.
344
      See Daniel Alpert et al., The US private sector Job Quality Index, Cornell University, November 2019; Chad Bown and
      Caroline Freund, The problem of US labor force participation, Peterson Institute for International Economics, working
      paper number 19-1, January 2019; Edward Luce, “From financial crisis to inequality: How economists got it wrong,”
      Financial Times, October 21, 2019.
345
      See Daniel Alpert et al., The US private sector Job Quality Index, Cornell University, November 2019; Dani Rodrik and
      Charles Sabel, Building a good jobs economy, working paper, November 2019.
346
      OECD employment outlook 2017, OECD, 2017.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                       139


      In the United States, data used is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We sorted occupations
      based on wage level using categories from MGI’s The future of work in America: People and
      places, today and tomorrow. The annual or annualized median wages thresholds were less
      than $30,000 for the low-wage category in 2018, $30,000 to $60,000 for the middle-
      wage category, and greater than $60,000 for the high-wage category. For occupations
      that pay hourly, the calculation assumes a 40-hour workweek. Bureau of Labor Statistics
      Occupational Employment Statistics data are not fully comprehensive of the US workforce
      (for example, it excludes farming employment and the self-employed).

      The total number of workers in high-skill, high-wage jobs in 16 European countries and the
      United States in 2018 was 114 million, the middle-skill total number was 121 million, and the
      low-skill total number was 96 million.

      One of the limitations of the data on occupational polarization is the lack of longitudinal data
      that follows workers throughout their careers and tracks their changes across occupational
      categories. It is possible that many middle-skill workers are transitioning into higher-skill
      occupational categories, which may partially account for the growth in high-skill jobs and
      is not necessarily a negative development in the labor market. However, research by David
      Autor found that in the United States between 1980 and 2016, non-college-educated workers
      primarily moved from middle-skill occupations into low-skill occupations (a 12.3-percentage-
      point change), while the change in the share of college-educated workers was evenly split
      between low- and high-skill workers (changes of 3.4 and 3.5 percentage points, respectively).
      We have focused on the change in the share of employment by skill category because we do
      not have data on employment rates by occupational skill category in our 22 sample countries.
      Based on education level, employment rates are 16 to 40 percentage points higher for
      workers with a tertiary degree compared with workers with less than an upper secondary
      education, and 7 to 28 percentage points higher for those with an upper secondary degree
      compared with less than an upper secondary degree in 20 OECD countries, excluding Japan
      and South Korea. 347

      Debates in the inequality literature
      Gerald Auten and David Splinter recently published a working paper contradicting the
      existing literature on inequality, particularly in the United States, arguing that there has been
      little to no change in the after-tax income share of the top 1 percent. The paper adjusts for
      factors including: estimating income on an individual rather than a household basis due to
      declining marriage rates among low-income Americans, which may spread incomes across
      more households at the bottom; allocating corporations’ retained earnings on a shareholder-
      adjusted basis to individuals before and after the 1986 tax reform; and adjusting for retirement
      savings accounts and tax evasion, among other methodological adjustments. The authors
      found that the pretax income share of the top 1 percent increased since the 1960s, although
      at a lower rate than other estimates. 348

      Assessing relative poverty rates in the OECD
      We used OECD Income Distribution and Poverty statistics to assess relative poverty rates
      across countries. However, the methodology used to define relative poverty rates changed in
      2011. We combined the old income definition with the new income definition to create a longer
      time series on relative poverty. Australia, Canada, and Finland are exceptions to this rule. All
      three countries have data using the “new” income definition from the early 2000s.

      Assessing the impact of occupational polarization on wages
      Findings on the link between declining middle-skill jobs and the effect on wages are mixed.
      Some academics have found that the decline of middle-skill jobs has contributed to rising



      347
            See David Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32;
            OECD employment outlook 2017, OECD, 2017; Employment by education level, OECD, December 2019.
      348
            Gerald Auten and David Splinter, “Top 1 percent income tax shares: Comparing estimates using tax data,” AEA Papers and
            Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 307–11.




140   McKinsey Global Institute


wages for low-skill jobs, thereby narrowing the gap between middle- and low-skill jobs.
Other academics have found that job polarization has contributed to rising wage inequality,
particularly between college-educated and non-college-educated workers. According
to David Autor, as wages for college-educated workers have increased, wages for non-
college-educated workers have fallen, contributing to widening wage inequality. In theory,
as middle-skill jobs decline, downward pressure on low-skill wages increases as middle-skill
workers compete for low-skill jobs, while higher demand for high-skill jobs contributes to
rising wages. 349

Employee wage and nonwage compensation in the United States
The Bureau of Labor Statistics provides a breakdown of wages and nonwage benefits to
estimate the total cost of employment. Total benefits (including paid leave, supplemental
pay, insurance, health insurance, retirement and savings, as well as legally required benefits)
for the median civilian worker rose faster than the share of wages between 2009 and 2019.
This is due to wages and salaries declining for the median worker in real terms over the same
period. Overall, the median worker earns $0.40 per hour more in real terms in 2019 than
in 2009, with wages and salaries declining from $18.80 per hour to $18.70 per hour, and
benefits increasing from $8.70 per hour to $9.10 per hour. Civilian workers include those
employed in private industry and by state and local governments. 350

Real versus nominal wage growth in the United Kingdom and the United States
Recent statistics suggest that wage growth picked up in the United Kingdom and the United
States, but the headline figures are typically quoted in nominal terms. In the United Kingdom,
the three-month average of nominal wage growth (excluding bonuses) rose to 3.9 percent
in August 2019, the highest rate of nominal wage growth since 2009. After accounting for
inflation, wage growth rose 1.9 percent on a three-month average basis, the highest rate of
growth for four years. However, real wages are still lower than their pre-crisis peak. In the
United States, between August 2018 and August 2019, average nominal hourly earnings for
all private nonfarm employees rose 3.2 percent. In real terms, average wages rose 1.5 percent
over the period. 351

Chapter 3: Individuals as consumers
Converting changes in prices into additional working hours
GDP deflators (GDPi) for housing (P31CP40), health (P31CP060), education (P31CP100),
and final consumption expenditure of households on the territory (P31DC) are obtained from
the OECD for each country for each year from 2000 to 2017. Where i ∈ {final consumption
expenditure of households on the territory (total), housing (hg), health(hh), education(edu),
other(oth) (all goods and services that are not housing, healthcare, and education)}.

Households consumption by COICOP category (ci¬) is obtained for each country for the
years 2000 to 2017 from the OECD or national statistical agencies, if unavailable. Proportion
of spending that is housing (P31CP40), health (P31CP060), and education (P31Cp100) is
calculated (ki=ci/ctotal).

The GDP deflator (GDPoth) for goods and services that are not housing, healthcare, and
education is calculated using the formula: GDPoth = (GDPtotal – khg × GDPhg – khh ×
GDPhh – kedu × GDPedu)/(1 – khg – khh – kedu); this assumes that the GDP deflator
(P31DC) is the consumption weighted average of the GDP deflators for different categories of
goods and services.




349
      See Michael Boehm, “Job polarisation and the decline of middle-class workers’ wages,” VoxEU, February 2014; David
      Autor, “Work of the past, work of the future,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1–32.
350
      Employer costs for employee compensation: Compensation percentiles, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, June 2019.
351
      BBC News, “UK wage growth picks up to 11-year high,” August 2019; UK Office for National Statistics, Employee
      earnings in the UK: 2019, October 2019; Real average hourly earnings up 1.5 percent from August 2018 to August 2019,
      US Bureau of Labor Statistics, September 2019.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                  141


      The price increase (relative to overall price increase) for each category of good or service (xi) is
      calculated using the formula: xi = (GDPi,2017 – GDPi,2000)/(GDPi,2000) – (GDPtotal,2017 –
      GDPtotal,2000)/(GDP).

      All other things are assumed constant, including: volume of goods and services consumed
      by households; quality of all goods and services consumed by households; and per hours
      wage (relative to overall price level); taxes and transfer rates and savings (as a percentage of
      disposable income) is constant; households must absorb all price rises by working more.

      For a price increase xi, given the assumptions, spending on the good needs to go up by xi
      (because volume is constant). Consumption spending needs to increase by ki × xi. This is true
      for all goods and services; that is, consumption will need to go up by Σikixi.

      Assuming the saving rate stays constant, disposable income will need to increase by c × Σikixi
      where 1-c is the saving rate. National household saving rate data are taken from the OECD
      and national statistics agencies.

      Disposable income = wages × (number of hours worked) × (tax and transfer rate). Because
      all else is held constant, wages need to rise by c Σikixi ; using each term in the summation, it is
      possible to attribute increase or decrease in working hours to inflation in specific categories
      of goods.

      Incremental income analysis
      Data used include: nominal national accounts data on household income from 2000 to
      2017 from the OECD in local currency, number of households in the years 2000 to 2017 from
      national statistics agencies, and nominal national accounts data on consumption broken
      down by COICP purpose from 2000 to 2017 in local currency.

      For income, we consider the OECD data on household net adjusted disposable income, which
      includes wages and salaries, property income, social benefits in cash, and social transfers
      in kind (which also include healthcare-related transfers). The breakdown of household
      consumption is based on OECD national accounts data, which includes only household
      spending (excludes government spending) on various categories, including healthcare.

      Change in real income per household in 2017 dollars from 2000 to 2017 is calculated as
      follows. Total household income for each country for each year is deflated by the GDP deflator
      for final consumption expenditure of households on the territory (P31DC). The number is
      then converted to dollars using the 2017 exchange rate. The result is divided by the total
      number of households in the country in that year to get real income per household per year in
      2017 dollars. The difference between real income per household in 2017 and 2000 is taken to
      calculate change in real household income.

      Change in spending on housing, healthcare, and education and decomposition of price
      effects and non-price effects is calculated as follows for good x, where x can be housing,
      healthcare, or education. In each country and each year, nominal expenditure of good x in
      local currency (from consumption by COICP purpose data) is converted into 2017 dollars
      and divided by the number of households to get nominal spending on good x in 2017 dollars
      per household; let this result be con_goodx_nom. Con_goodx_nom is deflated by the GDP
      deflator for final consumption expenditure of households on the territory (P31DC) to remove
      general price effect; let the result be con_goodx_gen. Con_goodx_nom is deflated by the
      GDP deflator for good x. For housing, healthcare, and education this is housing (P31CP40),
      healthcare (P31CP060), and education (P31CP100), respectively; label this result con_
      goodx_abovegen. The real change in spending on good x is calculated as con_goodx_gen in
      2017 – con_goodx_gen in 2000. [Con_goodx_abovegen in 2017 – con_goodx_abovegen
      in 2000] is attributed to above general price inflation in good x, the rest of the change i.e.,
      [con_goodx_gen in 2017 – con_goodx_gen in 2000] – [con_goodx_above gen in 2017 –




142   McKinsey Global Institute


congoodx_abovegen in 2000], is attributed to non-price effects (for example, changes in
volume). This can be negative, for instance if the volume of good x consumed was lower.

The percentage of incremental income eroded is calculated as the increase in spending on
housing, healthcare, and education (con_goodx_gen in 2017 – con_goodx_gen in 2000)
divided by real income change.

The weighted average of the seven countries where incremental income was partially
eroded by housing, healthcare, and education is 61 percent (of which 34 percent is housing,
22 percent is healthcare, and 5 percent is education).

Chapter 4: Individuals as savers
To calculate stagnant or shrinking net wealth, we used Credit Suisse real median wealth
data. Our calculation is based on the following assumptions: low or stagnant wealth growth is
defined as a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of less than 1 percent from 2000 to 2018.
If median wealth is low or stagnant, then 50 percent of the population is assumed to have low
or stagnant growth. If median wealth is not low or stagnant, then 10 percent of the population
is assumed to have low or stagnant growth.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data for the United States
PSID data was used in the following analysis: rates of return by wealth group, net wealth
at each age group, negative net worth, new extremely indebted group at the bottom of
the wealth distribution who tend to be young and educated, correlation between wealth
and income.

In all cases, the data used is household data. The main variable used for wealth was “total
family wealth—including home equity,” which was used to indicate asset net wealth. Where it
was used in conjunction with demographic characteristics—age, education, or income—the
characteristics used were those of the head of the household.

Deciles were constructed for income and wealth using percentile cutoffs, with the value that
was precisely the tenth percentile being rounded up to the second decile.

The only place where the subcategories of wealth (e.g., real estate, deposits) were used rather
than the total figure was when calculating the rates of return by wealth group. In this case, net
asset totals were used rather than gross assets (i.e., used real estate wealth net of real estate
debt) on the basis that interest rates on loans to cover debt would cancel out rates of return
on that portion of an asset. In the comparatively rare cases where households had negative
asset balances (i.e., had gone into negative equity on their houses) they were assumed to have
a zero rate of return; negative rates of return were counted only where the assets themselves
depreciated (e.g., deposits and vehicles).

Chapter 5: The shifting role of institutions
Market intervention and public-sector spending
We selected each indicator based on how well it proxied the role of institutions in coordinating
markets and in public-sector spending for workers, consumers, and savers, as well as data
completeness. The inclusion or exclusion of indicators was a result of consensus between the
project team, project leadership, and McKinsey Global Institute challengers.

Where possible, data for each indicator is taken from OECD data; when gaps exist, national
statistics agency numbers were used. For each indicator selected, for each country, period 1,
2, 3, and 4 values were chosen. Where possible, they were for 2000, 2005, 2010, and 2018,
respectively. Where there were data gaps, the nearest available value was chosen.

For market intervention indicators, we indexed each indicator to 100, being the simple
average starting point in 2000. Simple averages were used to aggregate the subindex and
overall index.



The social contract in the 21st century                                                       143


      For public-sector spending, indicators are all in percent of GDP. The index value for each
      market (worker, consumer, and saver) is the sum of the subcomponents, while the overall index
      is the sum of all components.

      Summary of outcomes for workers, consumers, and savers
      We selected the summary indicators based on how well they proxied the individual
      expectations and outcomes we wanted to represent and data completeness. The inclusion
      or exclusion of indicators was a result of consensus between the project team, project
      leadership, and McKinsey Global Institute challengers.

      For each indicator selected, for each country, period 1, 2, 3 and 4 values were chosen. Where
      possible, they were for 2000, 2006, 2012, and 2018, respectively. Where there were data
      gaps, the nearest available value was chosen.

      If the indicator moved in the opposite direction—for example, higher wage growth indicates
      lower individual outcomes—the direction on the chart was flipped.

      Normalization of values for aging population
      An aging population is a trend experienced by all 22 countries under study. As a population
      ages, public-sector spending in many areas tends to go up automatically. For example, a
      larger proportion gets treated for chronic illness, which automatically raises healthcare
      social spending, holding all else constant. We attempted to correct for this in the following
      indicators: healthcare social spending and pensions spending.

      For healthcare, we start with the number of people who are young and prime-age (under
      65 years) and elderly (65 or older) in 2000 and 2018. Using the best data available from
      national statistics agencies, we estimated the average social healthcare spending per
      person in each age group. This was expressed as a ratio to the average spending per elderly
      person (average spending for a given age group/average spending for an elderly person (x)).
      The percentage increase in social health spending due to aging is then the weighted average
      (weighted by social spending per age group) of the change in proportion of population for
      each age group, i.e., percentage increase in social health spending due to aging = (xold) ×
      (percentage in proportion of elderly population) × (percentage change in population of young
      and adults).

      For pensions spending, we found the proportion of the population that was retired and due
      a pension in the year 2000 and how much each retiree got in social pension spending by
      dividing total social pension spending by number of retirees. We estimated the number of
      retirees there would be under no aging population by multiplying the proportion of retirees in
      2000 by the population in 2017, then calculated the estimated social pension spending and
      the change in social spending on pension costs under this scenario. We then subtracted the
      projected increase in spending under the no aging scenario from the actual changed and
      attributed the remaining increase in social pension spending to aging.

      Appendix: Heat maps
      For lines that illustrate a level (e.g., employment rate, net household saving rate), we took the
      whole universe of possible values for our 22 sample countries since 2000 (a maximum of 22 x
      18 = 396 data points) and found the quintile cutoff points.

      We disaggregated the indicators based on whether high values indicate a positive or a
      negative outcome. For example, high employment rates are categorized as positive, while
      high relative poverty rates are categorized as negative. As a result, we adjusted the coloring
      in the heat map to reflect these differences. For indicators where high values indicate positive
      outcomes, values below the 20th percentile are red, while for indicators where high values
      indicate negative outcomes, values below the 20th percentile are green.




144   McKinsey Global Institute


For lines that illustrate a change (e.g., change in the employment rate as a percentage of
the total working-age population, change in net mandatory pension replacement rates),
we established cutoffs based on the following principle: the center of the yellow bucket
is zero change, with brackets on either side at equal intervals. For example, change in the
employment rate is red if less than or equal to 5.0 percentage points, shading to orange,
yellow (figures within 2.5 percentage points of zero), light green, and green for greater than or
equal to 5.0 percentage points.

For lines that indicate a growth rate (e.g., CAGR of average wages), we calculated the values
for Period 1 (2000–05) and Period 2 (2013–18). We disaggregated the indicators based
on whether high values indicate a positive or negative outcome. We then created a coding
using the percentiles for the Period 1 and Period 2 values in our 22 sample countries (i.e.,
44 data points).


2. Definitions of main indicators
 Indicator               Definition                                                  Source

 Workers

 Working-age             Those aged 15 to 64.                                        OECD Stat
 population

 Prime-age adult         Those aged 25 to 64. The OECD defines “prime-age            OECD Stat
 population              adult” as those aged 25 to 54.

 Employment              The proportion of the working-age population that is        OECD Stat
 rate, percent           employed.
 of working-age
 population

 Unemployment            The number of unemployed people as a percentage             OECD Stat
 rate                    of the labor force, where the latter consists of the
                         unemployed plus those in paid or self-employment.
                         Unemployed people are those who report that they
                         are without work, that they are available for work,
                         and that they have taken active steps to find work in
                         the past four weeks. Youth unemployment refers to
                         unemployment among the population aged 15 to 24.

 Average                 Average annual hours worked is defined as the total         OECD Stat
 working hours           number of hours actually worked per year divided by
 actually worked         the average number of people in employment per
 per worker              year. Actual hours worked include regular work hours
                         of full-time, part-time and part-year workers, paid and
                         unpaid overtime, and hours worked in additional jobs,
                         excluding time not worked because of public holidays,
                         annual paid leave, own illness, injury and temporary
                         disability, maternity leave, parental leave, schooling or
                         training, slack work for technical or economic reasons,
                         strike or labor dispute, bad weather, compensation
                         leave, and other reasons.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                          145


       Indicator              Definition                                                  Source

       Statutory paid         Statutory paid holiday days reflect the number of days      OECD Stat
       holiday days           of paid annual leave. Entitlements generally reflect
                              those for full-time, full-year private-sector employees,
                              working a five-day week, who have been working for
                              their current employer for one year. In some countries
                              (e.g., Finland, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Poland,
                              and Turkey) the statutory minimum annual leave
                              entitlement varies with tenure.

       Length of paid         Total duration of paid maternity and parental leave         OECD Stat
       maternity,             refers to the total number of weeks women can be on
       parental, and          paid leave after the birth of a child, combining both
       home care              maternity and parental leave.
       leave available
       to mothers

       Length of              Paid father-specific leave refers to the number of          OECD Stat
       paid paternity,        paid weeks reserved for the exclusive use of fathers,
       parental, and          including entitlements to paid paternity leave, “father
       home care              quotas” or periods of paid parental leave that can be
       leave available        used only by the father and cannot be transferred to
       to fathers             the mother, and any weeks of paid sharable leave that
                              must be taken by the father in order for the family to
                              qualify for “bonus” weeks of parental leave.

       Working from           The percentage of employed persons aged 15 to               Eurostat
       home                   64 in the European Union (EU) who “usually” or
                              “sometimes” work from home.

       Job strain index       Job strain is defined as jobs where workers face more       OECD Stat,
                              job demands than the number of resources they have          European
                              at their disposal. It is a composite index; high level      Working
                              of job demands include: physical health risk factors,       Conditions
                              long working hours, and inflexibility of working hours.     Survey, and
                              Low level of job resources include: work autonomy           International
                              and learning opportunities, training and learning, and      Social Survey
                              opportunities for career advancement. Collectively,         Program
                              these indicators are used to assess the quality of the
                              working environment for workers.

       Workers facing         This indicator is based on worker responses to survey       OECD Stat;
       physical health        questions about physical health risk factors in their       European
       risk factors           job. Workers facing physical health risk factors refers     Working
                              to the degree that a job involves risk factors that could   Conditions
                              potentially impair workers' health. Such risk factors       Survey, and
                              include working in extreme temperatures, high noise,        International
                              exposure to chemicals, etc., as well as occurrence          Social Survey
                              of workplace accidents and personal evaluations of          Program
                              workplace as a dangerous place.




146   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                                 Source

 Workers                 This indicator refers to the percent of workers who        OECD Stat;
 expecting               expect career advancement in their job, based on           European
 promotion               workers’ responses to a survey.                            Working
                                                                                    Conditions
                                                                                    Survey, and
                                                                                    International
                                                                                    Social Survey
                                                                                    Program

 Workers                 This indicator refers to the number of workers who         OECD Stat;
 receiving               reported receiving training in their jobs, based on        European
 training                workers’ responses to a survey.                            Working
                                                                                    Conditions
                                                                                    Survey, and
                                                                                    International
                                                                                    Social Survey
                                                                                    Program

 Full-time work          Typically defined as workers who work more than 35         OECD Stat,
                         hours a week or based on a self-assessment of part-        national
                         time/full-time work; the precise definition varies by      statistical
                         national statistical agency.                               agencies

 Part-time work          Typically defined as workers who work less than 35         OECD Stat,
                         hours a week or based on a self-assessment of part-        national
                         time/full-time work; the precise definition varies by      statistical
                         national statistical agency. The OECD standardized         agencies
                         definition of part-time work is people in employment
                         who usually work less than 30 hours per week in their
                         main job.

 Involuntary             Typically defined as workers who would prefer to work      OECD Stat,
 part-time work          more hours or those who say they cannot find full-         national
                         time work; the definition varies by national statistical   statistical
                         agency and is not standardized in OECD countries.          agencies

 Temporary               Temporary employment includes wage and salary              OECD Stat
 employment              workers whose job has a predetermined termination
                         date. National definitions broadly conform to this
                         generic definition but may vary depending on national
                         circumstances. It is measured as percentage of
                         dependent employees (i.e., wage and salary workers).

 Permanent               Permanent employment includes wage and salary              OECD Stat
 employment              workers whose job does not have a predetermined
                         termination date. National definitions broadly conform
                         to this generic definition but may vary depending on
                         national circumstances. It is measured as percentage
                         of dependent employees (i.e., wage and salary
                         workers).

 Standard                This is a constructed indicator that tracks the            OECD Stat
 deviation of            standard deviation of the real employment share as
 employment              a percentage of the working-age population from
 share from              the trend in employment as calculated by the CAGR
 historical trend        between a beginning and an end year. The first period
                         is 1990—2004 and the second is 2004—2018.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                             147


       Indicator              Definition                                               Source

       Combined risk          The OECD defines this indicator as “labor market         OECD Stat
       of job loss, lost      insecurity.” It is defined in terms of the expected
       wages, and             earnings loss associated with unemployment. This
       duration of            loss depends on the risk of becoming unemployed,
       unemployment           the expected duration of unemployment, and the
                              degree of mitigation against these losses provided by
                              government transfers to the unemployed (effective
                              insurance).

       Median net             Median net equivalized income is median income           UNU-Wider
       equivalized            excluding taxes. Median income is captured at the        World Income
       income, real           household level and has been adjusted to account         Inequality
       2017 dollars           for differing household sizes and needs, meaning it      Database
                              has been equivalized to ensure comparability across      (WIID);
                              households.                                              Eurostat;
                                                                                       Luxembourg
                                                                                       Income Study

       Average annual         Average annual wages per full-time equivalent            OECD Stat
       real wages, real       dependent employee are obtained by dividing the
       2018 dollars           national-accounts-based total wage bill by the
                              average number of employees in the total economy,
                              which is then multiplied by the ratio of average usual
                              weekly hours per full-time employee to average usual
                              weekly hours for all employees.

       Relative poverty       The relative poverty rate is the percentage of people    OECD Stat
       rates after taxes      (in a given age group) whose income falls below the
       and transfers          relative poverty line after taxes and transfers; taken
       for the working-       as half the median household income of the total
       age population         population.

       Net national           The net national equivalized income share by quintile    UNU-Wider
       equivalized            expresses the share of total national income after       World Income
       income share           taxes held by each quintile of the population ordered    Inequality
       by quintile            according to the size of their incomes. Household        Database
                              sizes have been adjusted to take into account            (WIID);
                              differing needs and ensure comparability.                Eurostat,
                                                                                       Luxembourg
                                                                                       Income Study

       Labor share of         Labor income of employees is derived from national       The
       income                 accounts (whenever available), while the labor income    Conference
                              of the self-employed is proxied using mixed income.      Board Total
                              Mixed income from the national accounts reports          Economy
                              the self-employed income accrued to both capital         Database
                              and labor. However, the definition assumes that the
                              income earned by self-employed persons is by and
                              large accrued to labor because these types of workers
                              generally rely mostly on labor in the production
                              process.

       High-skill             High-skill occupations include jobs classified under     OECD
       occupations            the ISCO-88 major groups 1, 2, and 3.                    employment
                                                                                       outlook 2017




148   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                                Source

 Middle-skill            Middle-skill occupations include jobs classified under    OECD
 occupations             the ISCO-88 major groups 4, 7, and 8.                     employment
                                                                                   outlook 2017

 Low-skill               Low-skill occupations include jobs classified under       OECD
 occupations             the ISCO-88 major groups 5 and 9.                         employment
                                                                                   outlook 2017

 Polarization            The polarization score is a constructed measure           OECD
 score                   calculated by summing the value of the change in          employment
                         employment for both high- and low-skill occupations       outlook 2017
                         and then subtracting the change in middle-skill
                         occupations.

 Consumers

 Harmonised              The HICP measures the change over time in the             Eurostat;
 Index of                prices of consumer goods and services acquired,           National
 Consumer                used, or paid for by euro area households. The            statistical
 Prices (HICP)           methodology is consistent across all countries in         agencies
                         the EU and the United States. The HICP measures
                         the development over time for fixed consumption
                         segments—sets of consumer expenditures that serve
                         a common purpose—rather than a fixed basket of
                         goods. The consumption segments follow the COICOP
                         Classification including: food and nonalcoholic
                         beverages; alcoholic beverages, tobacco; clothing
                         and footwear; housing, water, electricity, gas, and
                         other fuels; furnishings, household equipment, and
                         routine house maintenance; health; transportation;
                         communications; recreation and culture; education;
                         restaurants and hotels; and miscellaneous goods and
                         services. It covers only actual monetary transactions
                         directly conducted by households (i.e., excludes
                         imputed rents for housing). We have constructed
                         an indicator that compares the changes in product
                         category-specific prices to overall changes in prices
                         for all product categories.

 Average cost of         This indicator is the average cost of broadband per       cable.co.uk
 broadband               month in dollars.

 Individuals with        The percentage of households who reported that they       OECD Stat
 internet access         had access to the internet. In almost all cases, access
                         is via a personal computer either using a dial-up,
                         ADSL, or cable broadband connection. This indicator
                         is measured in percentage of all households.

 Cellular mobile         This indicator measures the number of mobile phone        World Bank
 penetration             subscriptions per 100 inhabitants in a country.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                           149


       Indicator              Definition                                                   Source

       Total spending         This is a constructed measure using the final                OECD Stat;
       on nonbasic            consumption expenditure of households from national          national
       goods                  accounts data, broken into the COICOP classification         statistical
                              of product categories. “Nonbasic” spending refers            agencies
                              to all categories except housing, healthcare, and
                              education as a percentage of total final consumption
                              expenditure of households.

       Spending on            This is a constructed measure using the final                OECD Stat;
       basic goods            consumption expenditure of households from national          national
       (housing,              accounts data, broken into the COICOP classification         statistical
       healthcare, and        of product categories. “Basic goods” spending refers         agencies
       education)             to spending on housing, healthcare, and education as
                              a percentage of total final consumption expenditure of
                              households.

       Broadband              This indicator captures the mean download speed in           cable.co.uk
       speed                  megabits per second.

       Road quality           This indicator is a survey question that asks, “In           World
       index                  your country, how is the quality (extensiveness and          Economic
                              condition) of road infrastructure?,” where 1=extremely       Forum, Global
                              poor, among the worst in the world and 7=extremely           competitive-
                              good, among the best in the world.                           ness Index

       Competence             This indicator is a survey question that asks                World Bank
       and quality            respondents to rank the competence and quality of            Logistics
       of logistics           logistics services from “very low” (1) to “very high” (5).   Performance
       services index                                                                      Index

       Cost of                The definition of “affordable housing” varies across         McKinsey
       minimum                economies, but generally it includes a financial             Global Institute,
       acceptable             component (the share of income devoted to housing),          A blueprint for
       housing, also          a standard for what constitutes minimum socially             addressing
       known as the           acceptable housing with a clear idea of what income          the global
       largest city           groups are affected, and at what income level                affordable
       affordability          households should be eligible for housing assistance.        housing
       gap                                                                                 challenge
                                                                                           (2014)

       Out-of-pocket          Out-of-pocket payments are expenditures borne                OECD Stat
       spending on            directly by a patient where neither public nor private
       healthcare             insurance covers the full cost of the health good or
                              service. It can be measured as a percentage of total
                              current health expenditure or as a percentage of GDP.

       Total healthcare       This indicator refers to the share of the total              OECD Stat
       coverage               population covered by public and primary private
                              health insurance.

       Density of             This indicator measures the number of hospital beds          OECD Stat
       hospital beds,         per 1,000 population.
       per 1,000
       persons




150   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                               Source

 Educational             This indicator refers to the share of the population     OECD Stat
 attainment,             aged 25–64 who have completed tertiary education,
 percent of              the highest level of education. This includes both
 population with         theoretical programs leading to advanced research
 tertiary degree         or high-skill professions such as medicine and more
                         vocational programs leading to the labor market. In
                         ISCED Classifications, tertiary education refers to
                         ISCED 5-8.

 Rates of                This indicator refers to the share of overcrowded        OECD
 housing                 households as a percentage of total households           Affordable
 overcrowding            in the bottom quintile. A household is considered        Housing
 among                   overcrowded if it does not have at its disposal a        Database
 households              minimum number of rooms equal to: one room for the
 in the bottom           household, one room per adult couple, one room for
 quintile                each single adult, one room per pair of single persons
                         of the same sex between 12 and 17 years of age, one
                         room for each single person between 12 and 17 who
                         are not included in the previous category (same sex),
                         and one room per pair of children under 12.

 Life expectancy         Life expectancy at birth and at ages 40, 60, 65, and     OECD Stat
 at birth                80 is the average number of years a person that age
                         can be expected to live, assuming that age-specific
                         mortality levels remain constant. Life expectancy
                         at birth for the total population is estimated for all
                         countries, using the unweighted average of life
                         expectancy of men and women.

 Self-assessed           Self-assessed or “perceived” health status is the        OECD Stat
 health status           percentage of the population aged 15 years old or
                         over who report their health to be “good/very good”
                         (or excellent), “fair” (not good, not bad), “bad/very
                         bad.”

 Low birthweight         This indicator measures the number of live births        OECD Stat
 babies                  weighing less than 2,500 grams as a percentage of
                         the total number of live births.

 All cancer              All cancer mortality rates refer to age-standardized     OECD Stat
 mortality rates         death rates per 100,000 population for selected
                         causes, which are calculated using the OECD total
                         population for 2010 as the reference population. Age-
                         standardized death rates enable comparability across
                         countries.

 Healthy life            Healthy life expectancy (HALE) applies disability        World Health
 expectancy at           weights to health states to compute the equivalent       Organization
 birth or number         number of years of good health that a newborn can
 of expected             expect.
 healthy years




The social contract in the 21st century                                                          151


       Indicator              Definition                                                  Source

       PISA scores            These indicators are based on the average scores for        OECD
       in reading,            15-year-olds in participating countries on the Program
       mathematics,           for International Student Assessment test. PISA
       and science            focuses on the assessment of student performance in
                              reading, mathematics, and science for 15-year-olds.
                              PISA draws on content that can be found in curricula
                              across the world and looks at students’ ability to apply
                              knowledge and skills and to analyze, reason, and
                              communicate effectively as they examine, interpret,
                              and solve problems.

       Savers

       Real median            This indicator measures the net wealth (assets minus        Credit Suisse
       net wealth             liabilities) of the median adult, adjusted to account for
                              inflation.

       Real mean net          This indicator measures the average net wealth              Credit Suisse
       wealth                 (assets minus liabilities) of an adult in the population,
                              which has been adjusted to account for inflation.

       Net household          The net household saving rate represents the                OECD Stat
       saving rate            total amount of net saving as a percentage of net
                              household disposable income. It thus shows how
                              much households are saving out of current income
                              and how much income they have added to their net
                              wealth.

       Net pension            The net replacement rate is defined as the individual       OECD Stat
       replacement            net pension entitlement divided by net preretirement
       rate                   earnings, taking into account personal income taxes
                              and social security contributions paid by workers
                              and pensioners. It measures how effectively a
                              pension system provides a retirement income to
                              replace earnings, the main source of income before
                              retirement. This indicator is measured in percentage
                              of preretirement earnings by gender.

       Home                   The share of dwellings owned either outright or with a      OECD;
       ownership rate         mortgage as a proportion of the total dwelling stock.       definitions may
                                                                                          vary by country

       Real return on         The real return on the national stock market measures       OECD Stat
       national stock         the five-year growth rate of share prices on the
       market                 national stock market, adjusted for inflation.

       Wealth                 This indicator refers to the share of total net wealth      OECD Stat
       accruing to the        owned by the 10 percent wealthiest households. Net
       top 10 percent         wealth excludes pension plans related to employment.
       of the wealth
       distribution

       Wealth accruing        This indicator refers to the share of total net wealth      OECD Stat
       to the bottom          owned by the households in the three bottom
       60 percent             quintiles of wealth. Net wealth excludes pension
       of the wealth          schemes related to employment.
       distribution




152   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                                 Source

 Share of heavily        This indicator is the percent of households in a           OECD Stat
 indebted                country who are indebted and whose ratio between
 households              debt and income is greater than 3.

 Unable to face          For the European Union, this indicator refers to the       Eurostat; Board
 unexpected              percentage of persons in the total population who are      of Governors
 financial               in the state of enforced inability to face unexpected      of the Federal
 expense                 financial expenses. For the United States, this            Reserve
                         indicator refers to the share of adults who would          System, Leger,
                         borrow or sell something to pay for the expense            Financial
                         or who would not be able to cover the expense at           Planning
                         all. For Canada, this indicator refers to the share of     Standards
                         adults who believe that their bank account could not       Council
                         withstand a financial emergency.

 Old-age relative        This indicator estimates the number of persons 65          Sustainable
 poverty                 years or older with 50 percent or less of median           Governance
                         equivalized disposable income as a percentage of all       Indicators
                         citizens 65 years or older.

 Years of net            Net pension wealth is the present value of the flow        OECD Stat
 pension wealth          of pension benefits, taking account of the taxes and
 from mandatory          social security contributions that retirees have to pay
 pensions (also          on their pensions. It is affected by life expectancy and
 known as net            by the age at which people take their pensions, as
 pension wealth)         well by as indexation rules. This indicator is measured
                         as a multiple of annual net earnings by gender. Given
                         that we have selected the net pension wealth for a
                         male worker on the average wage, we assume they
                         consume their full average wage each year after they
                         retire, which gives us the number of years of net
                         pension wealth from mandatory pensions.

 Wealth volatility       Wealth volatility measures the standard deviation of       Credit Suisse
                         year-on-year changes in real average net wealth.

 Proportion of           This indicator captures the level of financial deposits    European
 median net              guaranteed by national governments in the event that       Banking
 wealth covered          the bank holding the deposits fails. It is measured as a   Authority;
 by deposit              percentage of median net wealth.                           national
 protection                                                                         financial
 legislation                                                                        regulators

 Financially             This indicator assesses the share of adults who            S&P Global
 literate                display a basic knowledge of four fundamental              Financial
 population              concepts in financial decision making: knowledge of        Literacy Survey
                         interest rates, interest compounding, inflation, and
                         risk diversification.

 Did not save for        This indicator captures the share of the population        World Bank
 old age                 aged 15 years and over who did not save for old age.

 Did not save            This indicator captures the share of the population        World Bank
 any money               aged 15 years and over who did not save any money in
                         the previous year.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                             153


       Indicator              Definition                                                 Source

       Share of               This indicator refers to the share of individuals who      OECD Stat
       individuals with       have equivalized net wealth below 25 percent of the
       net wealth less        income poverty line (three-month buffer). Net wealth
       than 25 percent        excludes pension schemes related to employment.
       of the income
       poverty line

       Share of               This indicator refers to the share of individuals who      OECD Stat
       individuals with       have equivalized net wealth below 50 percent of the
       net wealth less        income poverty line (six-month buffer). Net wealth
       than 50 percent        excludes pension schemes related to employment.
       of the income
       poverty line

       Share of               This indicator is the percent of households in a           OECD Stat
       indebted               country who are indebted and whose ratio between
       households             debt and assets is greater than 0.75.
       with debt-to-
       asset ratio
       above 75
       percent

       Cboe Volatility        This indicator forecasts volatility in the stock market    Cboe Global
       Index® (VIX®           based on real-time price options for the S&P 500           Markets
       Index)                 Index. It is used as a measure of market risk and
                              uncertainty.

       Market intervention and public-sector spending

       Employment             This metric captures the strictness of employment          OECD
       protection for         protection regulations for individual or collective
       regular workers        dismissals for workers on regular contracts. Covers
                              indicators such as notification procedures, length
                              of notification period, severance pay, definitions for
                              justified or unfair dismissal, compensation following
                              unfair dismissal, definitions of collective dismissals,
                              etc. The measures range from 0 (least strict) to 6
                              (most strict).

       Employment             This metric captures the strictness of employment          OECD
       protection             protection regulations for temporary workers. Covers
       for temporary          indicators such as valid uses of fixed-term contracts,
       workers                limits on using fixed-term contracts successively, legal
                              use of temporary work agencies, equal treatment of
                              regular and agency workers, etc. The measure ranges
                              from 0 (least strict) to 6 (most strict).

       Collective             This indicator captures the share of employees with        OECD Stat
       agreements             the right to bargain collectively as a percentage of
                              total employees.




154   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                                 Source

 Product-market          These metrics capture the regulatory barriers to           OECD
 regulation              firm entry and competition at the level of individual
 for tele-               sectors, broken down into state involvement and
 communica-              regulation in specific sectors (e.g., government equity
 tions,                  stakes in companies, regulations restricting number of
 transportation,         firms allowed to compete, etc.). The measure ranges
 and utilities           from 0 (least regulated) to 6 (most regulated).

 Retail price            This metric captures whether retail prices of certain      OECD
 controls                products are subject to price controls, including:
                         staple goods (e.g., bread, milk, etc.), gasoline, books,
                         CDs, liquefied petroleum gas, and other products, in
                         addition to regulations on nonprescription medicines
                         and restrictions on advertising prices and/or
                         discounts on prices of nonprescription medicines. The
                         measure ranges from 0 (least regulated) to 6 (most
                         regulated).

 Social housing          This indicator captures the stock of residential rental    OECD Stat
 stock                   accommodation provided at submarket prices and
                         allocated according to specific rules rather than
                         according to market mechanisms. It is measured as a
                         percentage of the total dwelling stock.

 Intensity of rent       These indexes measure 18 rental market regulations         Dr. Konstantin
 controls                across countries in three key areas: rent controls,        Kholodilin, DIW
                         tenant protection security, and house rationing. Each      Berlin
                         indicator is translated into a binary variable where 1
                         corresponds to whether a regulation applies in the
                         respective period and 0 if not. The higher the index,
                         the more limited the landlord’s actions, which typically
                         means stronger tenant protection.

 Level of market         This indicator is constructed by taking 1 divided by       OECD Stat
 intervention by         out-of-pocket payments, which are expenditures
 institutions in         borne directly by a patient where neither public nor
 the healthcare          private insurance covers the full cost of the health
 market                  good or service. It can be measured as a percentage
                         of total current health expenditure or as a percentage
                         of GDP. In principle, higher out-of-pocket spending
                         likely suggests lower involvement by institutions in the
                         healthcare market.

 Level of market         This indicator is constructed by taking 1 divided by       OECD Stat
 intervention by         private spending on education. Private spending on
 institutions in         education refers to expenditure funded by private
 the education           sources which are households and other private
 market                  entities.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                           155


       Indicator              Definition                                                Source

       Net pension            The net replacement rate is defined as the individual     OECD Stat
       replacement            net pension entitlement divided by net preretirement
       rates                  earnings, taking into account personal income taxes
                              and social security contributions paid by workers
                              and pensioners. It measures how effectively a
                              pension system provides a retirement income to
                              replace earnings, the main source of income before
                              retirement. This indicator is measured in percentage
                              of preretirement earnings by gender.

       Proportion of          The proportion of defined-benefit assets-under-           McKinsey
       defined-benefit        management refers to the share of total pension           Growth Cube
       assets-under-          assets-under-management that provide a guaranteed
       management             pension payment in retirement. This indicator is
                              measured in percent.

       Social                 There are two criteria for classifying an expenditure     OECD Stat
       spending on            item as social expenditure: (1) the benefits have to be
       unemployment,          intended to address one or more social purposes; (2)
       incapacity,            programs regulating the provision of benefits have to
       and active             involve either (a) inter-personal redistribution or (b)
       labor market           compulsory participation.
       programs
       (excluding             We have aggregated three categories of social
       training)              spending: unemployment (unemployment
                              compensation, severance pay, early retirement for
                              labor market reasons); incapacity-related benefits
                              (care services, disability benefits, benefits accruing
                              from occupational injury and accident legislation
                              including pensions, employee sickness payments),
                              and active labor market policies excluding training
                              spending (employment service and administration,
                              youth measures, subsidized employment, employment
                              measures for the disabled). It is measured as a
                              percentage of GDP.

       Public-sector          This indicator is constructed by multiplying average      OECD; ILO;
       wages                  annual wages in nominal national currency units for all   national
                              employees by the number of public-sector employees        statistical
                              divided by the country’s GDP in nominal national          agencies
                              currency units. The indicator is expressed in percent.

       Social spending        This indicator captures social spending on training,      OECD Stat
       on training            which is typically aggregated into active labor market
                              programs. We decided to separate it out to assess
                              how spending patterns have changed since the early
                              2000s. It is measured as a percentage of GDP.

       Social spending        Social spending includes spending on housing              OECD Stat
       on housing             allowances and rent subsidies. It is measured as a
                              percentage of GDP.

       Social spending        Social spending includes spending on in- and              OECD Stat
       on healthcare          outpatient care, medical goods, and prevention. It is
                              measured as a percentage of GDP.




156   McKinsey Global Institute


 Indicator               Definition                                               Source

 Public-sector           Public spending on education includes direct             OECD Stat
 spending on             expenditure on educational institutions as well
 education               as educational-related public subsidies given
                         to households and administered by educational
                         institutions. It is measured as a percentage of GDP.

 Public-sector           This indicator refers to government gross fixed          OECD Stat
 spending on             capital formation, which we have used to proxy for
 infrastructure          government infrastructure investment. It is measured
                         as a percentage of GDP.

 Social spending         This indicator includes noncategorical cash benefits     OECD Stat
 on family and           to low-income households and other social services
 other social            (income maintenance, social assistance, and
 policy areas            programs such as food subsidies). It is measured as a
                         percentage of GDP.

 Social spending         This indicator includes spending on pensions, early      OECD Stat
 on old-age              retirement pensions, home-help, and residential
 and survivors’          care subsidies for the elderly as well as pensions for
 pensions                survivors’ and funeral expenses. It is measured as a
                         percentage of GDP.




The social contract in the 21st century                                                       157


© Getty images


Bibliography
A                                                                                      B
Abdelal, Rawi, and John Ruggie, “The principles of embedded liberalism: Social         Bauer, Paul C., “Unemployment, trust in government, and satisfaction with
legitimacy and global capitalism,” in New Perspectives on Regulation, David Moss       democracy: An empirical investigation,” Socius: Sociological Research for a
and John Cisternino, eds., Cambridge, MA: The Tobin Project, 2009.                     Dynamic World, 2018, Volume 4, pp. 1–14.

Abegglen, James C., 21st-Century Japanese Management: New Systems, Lasting             Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo, “Wealth distribution and social mobility
Values, Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.                                     in the US: A quantitative approach,” American Economic Review, May 2019,
                                                                                       Volume 109, Number 5, pp. 1623–47.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo, Robots and jobs: Evidence from US
labor markets, NBER working paper number 23285, March 2017.                            Benjamin, Daniel J., et al., “Beyond happiness and satisfaction: Toward well-being
                                                                                       indices based on stated preference,” American Economic Review, September
Acemoglu, Daron, It’s good jobs, stupid, Economics for Inclusive Prosperity, policy    2014, Volume 104, Number 9.
brief number 13, June 2019.
                                                                                       Berisha, Meszaros, Long term rates, capital shares and income inequality, 35th
Aghion, Philippe, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, Growth, Inequality, and Globalization:    IARIW General Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, August 20–25, 2018.
Theory, History, and Policy, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
                                                                                       Bogaard, Amy, Clide Cowdery, and Jonathan Wolff, Inequality: past, present
Allen, Robert, “Engels’ pause: Technical change, capital accumulation, and             and future, Challenge of Government Conference 2018, Blavatnik School of
inequality in the British Industrial Revolution,” Explorations in Economic History,    Government, Oxford University, 2018.
October 2009, Volume 46, Issue 4.
                                                                                       Bouis, Romain, Romain A. Duval, and Johannes Eugster, Product market
Allianz Bank, Global Wealth Report, 2015–18.                                           deregulation and growth: New country-industry-level evidence, IMF working
Alpert, Daniel, et al., The US private sector Job Quality Index, Cornell Law School,   paper number 16/114, 2016.
November 2019.                                                                         Bown, Chad, and Caroline Freund, The problem of US labor force participation,
Amable, Bruno, and Ken Mayhew, “Unemployment in the OECD,” Oxford Review               Peterson Institute for International Economics, working paper number 19-1,
of Economic Policy, Summer 2011, Volume 27, Issue 2.                                   January 2019.

American Enterprise Institute, This way up: New thinking about poverty and             Brynjolfsson, Erik, Avinash Collis, and Felix Eggers, “Using massive online choice
economic mobility, 2019.                                                               experiments to measure changes in well-being,” Proceedings of the National
                                                                                       Academy of Sciences, March 2019, Volume 116, Number 15, pp. 7250–55.
American Enterprise Institute, Work, skills, community, 2018.
                                                                                       Business Services Association, Business services and place-based inclusive
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez, “Top incomes in the long         growth, 2018.
run of history,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2011, Volume 49, Number
1, pp. 3–71.                                                                           Bussolo, Maurizio, et al., Toward a new social contract: Taking on distributional
                                                                                       tensions in Europe and Central Asia, World Bank, 2018.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, “The China shock: Learning
from labor-market adjustment to large changes in trade,” Annual Review of              Bussolo, Maurizio, and Mathilde Lebrand, Feeling poor, feeling rich, or feeling
Economics, October 2016, Volume 8.                                                     middle-class: An empirical investigation, ECINEQ 2017, New York, NY, July 17–19,
                                                                                       2017.
Autor, David, et al., Concentrating on the fall of the labor share, NBER working
paper number 23108, January 2017.

Autor, David, “Work of the Past, Work of the Future,” AEA Papers and
Proceedings, May 2019, Volume 109, pp. 1—32.




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                        159


C                                                                                   E
California Economic Summit, 2019 roadmap to shared prosperity, 2019.                Economic Innovation Group, Escape velocity: How elite communities are pulling
                                                                                    away in the 21st century race for jobs, businesses, and human capital, 2018.
Cerisier, Frédérique, and Alice Rustique, Spain: Radical transformation of the
labour market, BNP Paribas EcoFlash, 2017.                                          Eden, Maya, and Paul Gaggl, On the welfare implications of automation, World
                                                                                    Bank policy research working paper number 7487, 2015.
Clark, Gregory, “The condition of the working class in England, 1209–2004,”
Journal of Political Economy, December 2005, Volume 113, Number 6.                  Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Princeton, NJ:
                                                                                    Princeton University Press, 1990.
Commission on Global Economic Transformation, Macroeconomic management
meets the new economy, Institute for New Economic Thinking, 2019.                   Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, and Lesia Nedoluzhko, “Inequality equilibria and
                                                                                    individual well-being,” Social Science Research, February 2017, Volume 62, pp.
Commission on Global Economic Transformation, Technological disruption in the       24–28.
global economy, Institute for New Economic Thinking, 2019.
                                                                                    Eurofound, Working conditions: Does employment status matter for job quality?,
Cook, Linda J., The Soviet Social Contract and Why It Failed: Welfare Policy and    2018.
Workers’ Politics from Brezhnev to Yeltsin, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1993.                                                                        European Trade Union Confederation, New trade union strategies for new forms
                                                                                    of employment, 2019.
Credit Suisse, Global Wealth Report, 2018.




D                                                                                   G
                                                                                    Garbinti, Bertrand, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty, Accounting
Dabla-Norris, Era, et al., Causes and consequences of income inequality: A global   for wealth inequality dynamics: Methods, estimates and simulations for France
perspective, International Monetary Fund, 2015.                                     (1800–2014), WID.world working paper series number 2016/5, World Inequality
Damme, Lauren, Rethinking the American social contract, New America                 Database, 2016.
Foundation, 2011.                                                                   Garnero, Andrea, Alexander Hijzen, and Sébastian Martin, More unequal but
Delsol, Jean-Philippe, Nicolas Lecaussin, and Emmanuel Martin, Anti-Piketty:        more mobile? Earning inequality and mobility in OECD countries, OECD Social,
Capital for the 21st Century, Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 2015.               Employment and Migration working paper number 177, February 2016.

Dinius, Oliver J., and Angela Vergara, eds., Company Towns in the Americas:         Gash, Norman, Sir Robert Peel: The Life of Sir Robert Peel after 1830, London,
Landscape, Power, and Working-class Communities, Athens, GA: The University         UK: Faber and Faber, 2011.
of Georgia Press, 2011.                                                             Green, Hardy, The Company Town: The Industrial Edens and Satanic Mills That
Duval, Romain A., et al., A narrative database of major labor and product market    Shaped the American Economy, New York, NY: Basic Books, 2010.
reforms in advanced economies, International Monetary Fund, 2018.




160                                          McKinsey Global Institute


H                                                                                     J
Hacker, Jacob S., The Great Risk Shift: The New Economic Insecurity and the           Judt, Tony, Ill Fares the Land, New York, NY: The Penguin Press, 2010.
Decline of the American Dream, New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2019.

Hall, Peter, and David Soskice, eds., Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional
Foundations of Comparative Advantage, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2001.                                                                                 K
Hall, Peter, “The changing role of the state in liberal market economies,” in The     Kirkland, Christopher, “Placing the Thatcher reforms in the context of the capital/
Oxford Handbook on the Transformation of the State, Stephan Leibfried et al.,         labour relationship,” in The Political Economy of Britain in Crisis: Trade Unions and
eds, Oxford, UK; Oxford University Press, 2015.                                       the Banking Sector, London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
Haunschild, Axel, “Lifestyles as social contracts between workers and                 Kochar, Rakesh, and Richard Fry, “Wealth inequality has widened along racial,
organizations,” Schmalenbach Business Review, October 2011, Volume 63, Issue          ethnic lines since end of Great Recession,” Pew Research Center, December
4.                                                                                    2014.
Hollinger, Peggy, “A hollowing middle class,” OECD Observer, 2012.                    Komlos, John, “Hollowing out of the middle class: Growth of income and its
                                                                                      distribution in the US, 1979–2013,” Challenge, 2018, Volume 61, Issue 4.
Houseman, Susan N., and Michael J. Mandel, eds., Measuring Globalization:
Better Trade Statistics for Better Policy, Volume 1, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn       Krugman, Paul, The Age of Diminished Expectations: US Economic Policy in the
Institute for Employment Research, 2015.                                              1990s, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994.
Hudson-Sharp, Nathan, and Johnny Runge, International trends in insecure work:
A report for the Trades Union Congress, National Institute of Economic and Social

                                                                                      L
Research, May 2017.




I
                                                                                      Laudage, Sabine, “Part-time work and family building in OECD countries,” ifo
                                                                                      DICE Report, April 2015, Volume 13, Issue 1.

                                                                                      Lazear, Edward P., “Job security provisions and employment,” The Quarterly
International Labor Organization, Global wage report 2018/2019, 2019.                 Journal of Economics, August 1990, Volume 105, Number 3.
International Labor Organization, Women at work: Trends 2016, 2016.                   Lijphart, Arend, Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance in
                                                                                      Thirty-Six Countries, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2012.
International Monetary Fund, G20 Report on strong, sustainable, balanced, and
inclusive growth, 2018.

International Monetary Fund, Lessons from the Old Masters on assessing equity
and efficiency: A primer for fiscal policymakers, 2017.

International Panel on Social Progress, Rethinking society for the 21st century,
2018.

International Trade Union Confederation, Frontline campaigns and four pillars for
action 2019, 2019.

Ipsos Public Affairs, What worries the world, 2016.




                                            The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                    161


M
                                                                                       McKinsey Global Institute, “Tech for Good”: Smoothing disruption, improving
                                                                                       well-being, 2019.

Mathias, Peter, The First Industrial Nation: The Economic History of Britain           McKinsey Global Institute, Technology, jobs, and the future of work, 2016.
1700–1914, New York, NY: Routledge, 2001.                                              McKinsey Global Institute, Testing the resilience of Europe’s Inclusive Growth
McKinsey & Company, Building on Canada’s strong retirement readiness, 2015.            Model, 2018.

McKinsey & Company, Is Ireland’s population ready for retirement?, 2015.               McSorley, Leaza, Inequality, well-being and inclusive growth, Productivity
                                                                                       Insights Network, 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute, Digital globalization: The new era of global flows, 2016.
                                                                                       Milanovic, Branko, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization,
McKinsey Global Institute, The future of women at work: Transitions in the age of      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
automation, 2019.
                                                                                       Mommsen, Wolfgang, ed., The Emergence of the Welfare State in Britain and
McKinsey Global Institute, The future of work in America: People and places,           Germany, 1850–1950, London, UK: Routledge, 2018.
today and tomorrow, 2019.

McKinsey Global Institute, Global growth: Can productivity save the day in an
aging world?, 2015.

McKinsey Global Institute, Globalization in transition: The future of trade and
                                                                                       N
value chains, 2019.                                                                    National Economic and Social Rights Initiative, A new social contract, 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute, Housing affordability: A supply-side toolkit for cities,    Nolan, Brian, ed., Generating Prosperity for Working Families in Affluent
2017.                                                                                  Countries, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute, Independent work; Choice, necessity, and the gig            Norton, Michael I., and Dan Ariely, “Building a better America—one wealth quintile
economy, 2016.                                                                         at a time,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, January 2011, Volume 6, Issue
                                                                                       1, pp. 9–12.
McKinsey Global Institute, Inequality: A persisting challenge and its implications,
2019.



                                                                                       O
McKinsey Global Institute, Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time
of automation, 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute, The new global competition for corporate profits,
2015.                                                                                  OECD, A broken social elevator? How to promote social mobility, 2018.

McKinsey Global Institute, A new look at the declining share of labor income in the    OECD, Divided we stand: Why inequality keeps rising, 2011.
United States, 2019.                                                                   OECD, Education at a glance 2019, 2019.
McKinsey Global Institute, Outperformers: High-growth emerging economies               OECD, Fiscal sustainability of health systems: Bridging health and finance
and the companies that propel them, 2018.                                              perspectives, 2015.
McKinsey Global Institute, People on the move: Global migration’s impact and           OECD, The framework for policy action on inclusive growth, 2018.
opportunity, 2016.
                                                                                       OECD, The governance of inclusive growth, 2015.
McKinsey Global Institute, Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in
advanced economies, 2016.                                                              OECD, How’s life? 2017: Measuring well-being, 2017.

McKinsey Global Institute, The power of parity: How advancing women’s equality         OECD, In it together: Why less inequality benefits all, 2015.
can add $12 trillion to global growth, September 2015.
                                                                                       OECD, Inequalities in household wealth across OECD countries, 2018.
McKinsey Global Institute, Skill shift: Automation and the future of the workforce,
2018.                                                                                  OECD, Learning in rural schools: Insights from PISA, TALIS and the literature,
                                                                                       2019.
McKinsey Global Institute, Solving the productivity puzzle: The role of demand
and the promise of digitization, February 2018.                                        OECD, OECD employment outlook, 2013–18 editions.

McKinsey Global Institute, Superstars: The dynamics of firms, sectors, and cities      OECD, Pensions at a glance, 2009–18 editions.
leading the global economy, 2018.                                                      OECD, Resilience in a time of high debt, 2017.
McKinsey Global Institute, Tackling the world’s affordable housing challenge,          OECD, Under pressure: The squeezed middle class, 2019.
2014.




162                          McKinsey Global Institute


P                                                                                  T
Papanicolas, Irene, Liana R. Woskie, and Ashish K. Jha, “Healthcare spending in    Taylor, Matthew, Good work: The Taylor review of modern working practices, UK
the United States and other high-income countries,” JAMA, March 2018, Volume       Government, 2017.
319, Number 10.
                                                                                   Timmins, Nicholas, The Five Giants: A Biography of the Welfare State, London,
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge, MA: Harvard       UK: HarperCollins, 2001.
University Press, 2014.
                                                                                   Tüzemen, Didem, and Jonathan Willis, “The vanishing middle: Job polarization and
Piketty, Thomas, The Economics of Inequality, London, UK: Harvard University       workers’ response to the decline in middle-skill jobs,” Economic Review, Federal
Press, 2015.                                                                       Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013.




R                                                                                  W
Raff, Daniel, and Lawrence Summers, “Did Henry Ford pay efficiency wages?,”        World Bank, The changing wealth of nations, 2018.
Journal of Labor Economics, October 1987, Volume 5, Number 4.
                                                                                   World Bank, Fair progress? Economic mobility across generations around the
                                                                                   world, 2018.


S
                                                                                   World Bank, Growing united: Upgrading Europe’s convergence machine, 2017.

                                                                                   World Bank, What is inclusive growth?, 2009.
Saint-Martin, Anne, and Danielle Venn, “Does part-time work pay?,” OECD            World Economic Forum, Dialogue series on new economic and social frontiers:
Observer, 2010.                                                                    Shaping the new economy in the fourth industrial revolution, 2019.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman, “Wealth inequality in the United States        World Economic Forum, Inclusive development index, 2018.
since 1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May 2016, Volume 131, Issue 2.                                          World Economic Forum, Investing in (and for) our future, 2019.

Saunders, Adam, “Technology’s impact on growth and employment,” in The Age         World Inequality Lab, World inequality report, 2018.
of Perplexity: Rethinking the World We Knew, Madrid, Spain: BBVA, Open Mind,
Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial, 2018.

Saxenian, AnnaLee, “The Silicon Valley model: Economic dynamism, social
exclusion,” in Reconceptualizing Development in the Global Information Age,
Manuel Castells and Pekka Himanen, eds., Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2014.

Shafik, Nemat, “A new social contract,” Finance & Development, International
Monetary Fund, December 2018, Volume 55, Number 4.

Snower, Dennis J., Toward human-centered capitalism: Exploring a new social
contract, Brookings Institution, November 2019.

Steinmetz, Greg, The Richest Man Who Ever Lived: The Life and Times of Jacob
Fugger, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2015.

Stiglitz, Joseph, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi, Report by the Commission
on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress, 2009.

Stiglitz, Joseph, The Great Divide: Unequal Societies and What We Can Do About
Them, New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2015.

Strom, Shanya, and Mark Schmitt, Protecting workers in a patchwork economy,
The Century Foundation, 2016.




                             The social contract in the 21st century                                                                                               163




Related MGI and
McKinsey research
Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a         Poorer than their parents? Flat or falling incomes in
time of automation (December 2017)                         advanced economies (July 2016)
This MGI report explains that as many as 375 million       The real incomes of about two-thirds of households in
workers around the world may need to switch                25 advanced economies were flat or fell behind 2005
occupational categories and learn new skills.              and 2014. Without action, this phenomenon could have
                                                           corrosive economic and social consequences.




"Superstars": The dynamics of firms, sectors, and          The future of work in America: People and places, today
cities leading the global economy (October 2018)           and tomorrow (July 2019)
This report explores the question, “Is there a superstar   This report analyzes more than 3,000 US counties and 315
effect?” MGI shares research that uncovers the             cities and finds they are on sharply different paths. The
dynamics of superstar firms, sectors, and cities in the    trends outlined could widen existing disparities between
global economy.                                            high-growth cities and struggling rural areas, and between
                                                           high-wage workers and everyone else.




Inequality: A persisting challenge and its                 Housing affordability: A supply-side tool kit for cities
implications (June 2019)                                   (October 2017)
This discussion paper discusses how while the wealth       This paper discusses how the global housing stock has not
gap has narrowed globally, inequality within advanced      expanded quickly enough to keep up with a surge I demand,
economies has increased since the 1980s.                   but cities can focus on three supply-side solutions to make
                                                           progress.




Future of women at work: Transitions in the age of         Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and
automation (June 2019)                                     socioeconomic impacts (January 2020)
This report describes how concerted and creative new       This new report shows how Earth’s changing climate could
solutions are needed to enable women to seize new          impact socioeconomic systems across the world in the next
opportunities in the automated age; without them,          three decades. A yearlong, cross-disciplinary research
women may fall further behind in the world of work.        effort at McKinsey & Company provides some answers.




www.mckinsey.com/mgi

Download and listen to MGI podcasts on iTunes or at
www.mckinsey.com/mgi/publications/multimedia/

Cover image: Getty Images


McKinsey Global Institute




                                            The social contract in the 21st century
February 2020
Copyright © McKinsey & Company
Designed by the McKinsey Global Institute
www.mckinsey.com/mgi
   @McKinsey
   @McKinsey
